AADS1001 - Commons iSeminarTopics vary. Open only to first-year students. General Elective credit only. [1] (No AXLE Credit)

AADS1010 - Introduction to African American and Diaspora StudiesFoundations of African American culture from ancient African history and through contemporary issues in the African American experience and the larger diaspora. The characteristics, developments, and dynamics of diaspora culture in the Americas, with a particular focus on the United States. [3] (P)

AADS1016 - Race MattersRace and racism in the United States and their impact on democratic practices. General intellectual and cultural manifestations of the significance of race and how it influences democratic reform: racial preferences, the prison industrial complex, national security, HIV/AIDS, and elections. [3] (US)

AADS1108 - Making of the African Diaspora1790 to the mid-twentieth century. Slave politics and abolition, the meaning of freedom after emancipation, and black workers' struggle for democracy and citizenship. Resistance to empire and colonialism. Migration, race and color ideology, religion, and culture. [3] (P)

AADS1111 - First-Year Writing SeminarIndependent learning and inquiry in an environment in which students can express knowledge and defend opinions through intensive class discussion, oral presentations, and written expression. May be repeated for credit once if there is no duplication of topic, but students may earn only up to 3 credits in any 1111 course per semester of enrollment. [3; maximum of 6 credits total for all semesters of 1111] (AXLE credit category varies by section)

AADS1204 - Diaspora FeminismsIntroduction to feminism in multiple diasporic places and communities. Comparison of black feminisms across time and space. [3] (INT)

AADS1404 - Comparative Black Male WritersDiasporic black male fiction and poetry writers. Themes of sexuality and sexual identity, exile, home, violence, color, and class. [3] (HCA)

AADS1506 - Reel to Real: Film Aesthetics and RepresentationOppositional cinematic practices of black filmmakers. Hollywood representations of blacks. The theoretical language of film criticism, styles, genres, periods. [3] (P)

AADS1706 - Capoeira: Afro-Brazilian Race, Culture, and ExpressionOrigins of an Afro-Brazilian martial art form. Influence on Brazilian and world culture in the areas of religion, dance, and music. Development as a social protest movement. Intersections of race, gender, class, power, and national identity. [3] (INT)

AADS1716 - The African City: Urban Landscapes on the Page, Screen, and CanvasStudy of African cities north and south of the Sahara through literature, visual and popular cultures, and history.Impact of colonial and postcolonial practices and policies on urban landscapes, urban relationships, and resources. Gendered experiences of the city in fiction, non-fiction, music, art, and film. [3] INT

AADS1808 - On Whiteness: Whiteness Studies, Race, and IdentityKey texts and thinkers on whiteness and white identity. Whiteness as a historical construct. Unpacking the phrase "white privilege." [3] (US)

AADS1906 - Curating Black Lives: Imagination, Art, and Global Social ChangeVisual arts, social change, and black social movements. Aesthetics, value, and social impact of art and social change efforts. Role of the arts in shaping collective black identity and historical memory of national and global social movements. [3] (INT)

AADS2104 - Popular Culture and Black Sexual PoliticsConstructed images of black masculinity, femininity, and sexuality in popular culture. Social political hierarchies in society at-large. [3] (HCA)

AADS2106 - African Diaspora: A Problem for ThoughtBeginning with the slave trade in Europe to the formation of slave colonies in the Americas. Meaning of diaspora for African subjects in the 18th-19th centuries, and challenges to racism and colonialism in the African Diaspora in the 20th century. [3] (P)

AADS2148 - Blacks in Latin America and the CaribbeanDistinctive cultural forms and patterns in the Caribbean basin and Latin America from the sixteenth century to the present. Diverse origins of culture. Slave society's impact on cultural production. [3] (INT)

AADS2166 - African American Influences on Country MusicAfrican and African American aesthetics, instruments, and people. Southern rural folk music in the United States. [3] (US)

AADS2168 - Black Migrations in the African DiasporaThe impact of migration in a post-civil rights and post-colonial world. Political tensions, identity politics, and solidarity. Comparative anthropological and sociological narratives on race, culture, and ethnicity. Countries and regions include Democratic Republic of Congo, France, Ghana, Liberia, Tanzania, parts of Asia, and the U.S. [3]

AADS2178 - Global AfricaThe globalization of Africa within the context of Arab and European expansion. Historical flashpoints and contemporary events. The invention of Africa in literary and political discourses. The geopolitics of aid and development. Africa's relationship with the African diaspora, including modern migrations and debates on the racial and geographic divide between Arab regions north and south of the Sahara. [3] (INT)

AADS2204 - Black Women and the Politics of Blackness and BeautyCompeting and contested meanings of beauty and race in the post-black society. The role of traditional and new media in self-expressions and self-understandings of color, body image, hair, and relationships. [3] (HCA) AADS2214 - History and Myth: Black Women in the United States

Competing and contested meanings of beauty and race in the post-black society. The role of traditional and new media in self-expressions and self-understandings of color, body image, hair, and relationships. [3] (HCA) AADS2214 - History and Myth: Black Women in the United StatesComplexities of being black and female in the history of the United States. Interrogation of racism, class, sexuality, and sexism. Black women's multifaceted, diverse community roles. [3] (HCA)

AADS2294 - Black Paris - Paris Noir: The African Diaspora and the City of LightThe lived experiences, tensions, belonging, and representations of people of African descent who self-identify and are identified as Black or Noir in Paris, France, from the interwar years to the present. Diversity, intergroup relations, and race beyond the United States. Not open to students who have earned credit for AADS 1111Section 05 without permission. Total credit for this course and AADS 1111 Section 05 will not exceed 3 credit hours. Credit hours reduced from second course taken (or from test or transfer credit) as appropriate. [3] (INT) AADS2294W - Black Paris

Section 05 without permission. Total credit for this course and AADS 1111 Section 05 will not exceed 3 credit hours. Credit hours reduced from second course taken (or from test or transfer credit) as appropriate. [3] (INT) AADS2294W - Black ParisExperiences, tensions, belonging, and representations of people of African descent who self-identify and are identified as Black or Noir in Paris, France; from the interwar years to the present. Diversity and intergroup relations. Not open to students who have earned credit for AADS 1111 Section 05. [3] (INT)

AADS2306 - Race, Mixed Race, and "Passing."Social, legal constructions and live experiences of race. Phenomenon of "passing" and category of "mixed race"in fiction, film, and land-mark court cases. [3] (HCA)

AADS2308 - Critical Race Theory: Race, Racism and Narratives in EducationFoundations, methodologies, and policy-analysis methods of Critical Race Theory as tool of educational practices and policies. [3] (SBS)

AADS2356 - African Spirits in Exile: Diaspora Religions in the AmericasUse of anthropology, folklore, history, and literature to examine the history of Haitian Vodun, Cuban Santeria, Brazilian Candombl√©, New Orleans Voodoo, and Trinidadian Orisha worship. Comparisons with Black Christian traditions and supernatural beliefs beyond organized religion. [3] (P)

AADS2514 - Insider/Outsider: Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and Trans Black HistoriesHistory, culture and politics of Black lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, and queer (LGBTQ) communities during the 20th and 21st centuries. [3] (P)

AADS2654 - Memoirs and BiographiesBiographies and autobiographies as lenses for the study of historical trends and events; development of gender, sexual, and racial identities in subjects. [3] (US)

AADS3004 - The Morrisonian Era: Toni Morrison and American Social RealityFiction, anthologies, and essays of Toni Morrison. Intersections of race, gender, and class as touchstones in American social reality and Morrison's body of ideas and subsequent works. [3] (HCA)

AADS3006 - James Baldwin: Five Ways of Looking at His LifeThe author through literature, art, film, politics, and place. Five places critical in his artistic evolution: Harlem and Greenwich Village, New York; Paris and St. Paul-de-Vence, France; and Turkey. Film recreations of his life and writings. [3] (INT)

AADS3016 - GOAT: Life, Times, and Politics of Muhammad Ali"The Greatest Of All Time" (GOAT)--Muhammad Ali--and his impact on U.S. sports history, U.S. political culture, global black freedom struggles, and engagement with the Nation of Islam. Offered on a graded basis only. [3]

AADS3104W - Soul Food as Text in Text: An Examination of African American FoodwaysDistinctions between Southern food and soul food. Soul food as performance and projection of gender and racial identity. Cookbooks as literary artifacts. Soul food in American popular culture, and in African American, Southern, and women's writing. Soul food and community formation. [3] (HCA)

AADS3178 - Colonialism and Its AfterlivesAfrican and Caribbean cultures of colonialism. Forms of decolonization and the predicament of neocolonialism from the emergence of capitalism to the present. The historical and anthropological projects of empire and race-making. Causes and strategies of expansion. Forms of representation and knowledge production. Discourses around intimacy, illness and hygiene. Practices of coercion and violence. [3] (INT)

AADS3204W - African American Children's LiteratureFrom the seventeenth century to the present. Oral and written; fiction and non-fiction. Major works, writers, and genres. [3] (HCA)

AADS3206 - Mystery, Murder, and Mayhem in Black Detective FictionDetective fiction in America, beginning with Edgar Allan Poe, the founder of the genre in the American literary tradition, and continuing on with such black writers as Chester Himes, Walter Mosley, Paula Wood, and Pamela Thomas-Graham. [3] (HCA)

AADS3208W - Blacks in the MilitaryBlack participation in American and other wars, from the Revolutionary and Civil wars to ongoing global conflicts. Issues of democracy and freedom. Thematic explorations through film. [3] (P)

AADS3214 - Black Masculinity: Social Imagery and Public PolicyHistorical and contemporary debates, perceptions, and attitudes. Public policy debates surrounding disparate incarceration rates and sentencing, policing, racial profiling. Social imagery, "down low" homosexuality, criminality, hypersexuality, and athleticism. [3] (SBS)

AADS3248 - Atlantic African Slave TradeCultural, economic, and social aspects of the African slave trade into the Americas from the 16th to 19th centuries. Transformation of the slave trade as a result of abolition and suppression. [3] (SBS)

AADS3258 - Black Issues in EducationRace, ethnicity, gender, class and their relationships to both the broader roles of schooling and education in American society. Historical foundation of education for African Americans, educational and socioeconomic inequality, family structures, and social policy initiatives. [3] (SBS)

AADS3278 - Black EuropeHistory and politics of the African Diaspora in Europe. Focus on Britain, France, Germany, the Netherlands, and Scandinavia. European Union debates about social exclusion; race in the European context. [3] (INT)

AADS3278W - Black EuropeHistory and politics of African Diaspora in Britain, France, Germany, the Netherlands, and Scandinavia. European Union debates about social exclusion and race. [3] (INT)

AADS3306 - Black DetroitFrom 1800 to present. Theory and practice of the Black Metropolis focusing on Detroit, Michigan, as a location of African-American community, commerce, and creativity. [3] (HCA)

AADS3336 - Literatures of ProtestStudy of Black protest through various literary and performative genres, novels, opinion-editorials, poetry, sermons, songs, from 18th century onwards. Exploration of the Black Jeremiad tradition in sermons and texts.[3] (HCA)

AADS3556 - The Political Economy of Racism: Erasures, Slavery, Eviction, and Fables of WhitenessDecoding racism in US legislation, novels, historical and political texts, sociological studies, and films. [3] (US) AADS3850 - Independent Study

Decoding racism in US legislation, novels, historical and political texts, sociological studies, and films. [3] (US) AADS3850 - Independent StudyMay be repeated for a total of 6 credits, but students may earn only up to 3 credits per semester of enrollment.[1-3; maximum of 6 credits total for all semesters of AADS 3850] (No AXLE credit)

AADS3880 - Internship TrainingGraded on a Pass/Fail basis only and must be taken concurrently with 3881. These hours may not be included in the minimum number of hours required for the African American and Diaspora studies major. Under faculty supervision, students from any discipline can gain experience in a broad range of public and private institutions on issues relative to the black experience. A minimum of 3 hours of background reading and research will be completed in AADS 3881 concurrently with and regardless of the numbers of hours taken in internship training in 3880. Normally a 2.90 grade point average, 6 hours of prior work in AADS, and prior approval by the director of Undergraduate Studies in African American and Diaspora Studies of the student's plan are required. A research paper and report must be submitted at the end of the semester during which the internship training is completed. Corequisite: 3881. [Variable credit: 1-9] (No AXLE credit)

AADS3881 - Internship Readings and ResearchReadings conducted under the supervision of a member of the African American and Diaspora Studies program and a substantial research paper are required. Under faculty supervision, students from any discipline can gain experience in a broad range of public and private institutions on issues relative to the black experience. A minimum of 3 hours of background reading and research will be completed in AADS 3881 concurrently with and regardless of the numbers of hours taken in internship training in 3880. Normally a 2.90 grade point average, 6hours of prior work in AADS, and prior approval by the director of Undergraduate Studies in African American and Diaspora Studies of the student's plan are required. A research paper and report must be submitted at the end of the semester during which the internship training is completed. Corequisite: 3880. [Variable credit: 3-6]

AADS3890 - Special TopicsMay be repeated for credit more than once if there is no duplication in topic. Students may enroll in more than one section of this course each semester. [3] (No AXLE credit)

AADS4104 - Environmental History, Sustainability, and African American FoodwaysAdvanced treatment of African-American foodways. African-American environmental history. Effects of Seventh-Day Adventist and Black Muslim religious practices on African-American foodways. Creative writing of poet Kevin Young. [3] (HCA)

AADS4108 - Medical Apartheid: Race, Gender and HealthSlavery and the evolution of the fields of gynecology and obstetrics; enslaved black women's agency. Disparities in maternal health and maternal mortality rates, social determinants of health, structural racism, and risk factors. Scientific racism, consent, and implicit bias. [3] (SBS)

AADS4126 - The Black ClassicsKey texts and writers of the African Diaspora, from medieval Africa to the present. Fiction and non-fiction across the disciplines of anthropology, education, history, law, literature, politics, religion, and sociology. [3] (HCA) AADS4198 - Global Anti-Blackness and Black Power

Key texts and writers of the African Diaspora, from medieval Africa to the present. Fiction and non-fiction across the disciplines of anthropology, education, history, law, literature, politics, religion, and sociology. [3] (HCA) AADS4198 - Global Anti-Blackness and Black PowerThe relationship and relevance of Black Power to anti-blackness in the United States and globally. The systemic marginalization and exclusion of blacks in public life. Their resilience against and resistance to those efforts. [3]

AADS4228W - Black Girlhood: History, Performance and Counter-NarrativesHistorical and current social, political, and cultural constructions of black girlhood in the United States.Performances in which black girls engage to deconstruct and interrupt these constructions via scholarly works, poetry, film, photography, and novels. [3] (SBS)

AADS4256 - Haiti: Freedom and DemocracyThe Saint-Domingue Revolution from 1791 to 1803 and the development of Haiti from 1804 to the present. Haiti in global context; the revolution as a key moment in the Age of Revolution and the formation of the Black International. Historical monographs, novels, poetry, visual culture, and music. [3] (INT)

AADS4264 - Black Diaspora Women WritersComparative fiction by women from Francophone and Anglophone Africa , the Caribbean, and the United States.Novels of awakening (bildungsroman), themes of exile, home and alienation, identity as well as sexuality, class and color, slavery and colonialism. [3] (HCA)

AADS4270 - Research MethodsCollection, management, analysis and interpretation of data for research. Introduction to qualitative computer software programs. [3] (SBS)

AADS4506 - Slavery and Public MemorySystems of African enslavement in the Americas as a subject of debate among popular and academicaudiences. Memoirs, oral history, genealogy, literature, film, and other creative production. Public commemoration and tourist-related slavery observances around the diaspora. [3] (SBS)

AADS4588 - The Black Studies Movement(Offered as 4580 prior to Fall 20200 Black Studies and student movements of the 1960s and early 1970s.Intellectual traditions, precedents, and political ideologies of movements. Issues that sparked the call for Black Studies at different college campuses and public school systems. Not open to students who have completed 4580. [3] (SBS)

AADS4851 - Special Topics in HumanitiesTopics Vary. Literary, philosophical, and cultural texts. May be repeated for credit if there is no duplication in topic. [3] (HCA)

AADS4852 - Special Topics in Social SciencesTopics Vary. Diverse range of social and political questions, issues, and problems. May be repeated for credit if there is no duplication in topic. [3] (SBS)

AADS4979 - Senior Thesis in African American and Diaspora StudiesSenior Thesis in African American and Diaspora Studies. Supervised readings and independent research to produce an interdisciplinary research paper; topic to be selected in conjunction with a faculty member of African American and Diaspora Studies. Open only to seniors. [3] (No AXLE credit)

AADS4999 - Senior Honors ThesisSupervised readings and independent research for honors thesis under supervision of the adviser and another faculty member. Open only to seniors in the Honors Program. [3] (No AXLE credit)

ASL2100 - American Sign Language IThis introductory course includes basic communication skills of American Sign Language and "contact"language (e.g., nonmanual markers, fingerspelling, numbers, basic vocabulary, classifiers), the sign system continuum, culture implications, and media resources available. [3]

ASL2110 - American Sign Language IIThis is an intermediate course in American Sign Language that includes an in-depth look at the linguistics of ASL(e.g., morphology, syntax, phonology, and semantics) and current readings and research in the field. [3]

AMER1001 - Commons iSeminarTopics vary. General Elective credit only. [1] (No AXLE Credit)

AMER1002 - Introduction to American StudiesAn interdisciplinary approach to American culture, character, and life. Repeat credit for students who have completed 1002W. [3] (US)

AMER1002W - Introduction to American StudiesAn interdisciplinary approach to American culture, character, and life. Repeat credit for students who have completed 1002. [3] (US)

AMER1111 - First-Year Writing SeminarIndependent learning and inquiry in an environment in which students can express knowledge and defend opinions through intensive class discussion, oral presentations, and written expression. May be repeated for credit once if there is no duplication of topic, but students may earn only up to 3 credits in any 1111 course per semester of enrollment. [3; maximum of 6 credits total for all semesters of 1111] (AXLE credit category varies by section)

AMER1200 - Introduction to Southern StudiesAn interdisciplinary approach to southern American culture, character, and life approached from the interrelated perspectives of history and culture (literature, music, religion, images, rituals, material culture). [3] (US) AMER1700W - Writing for Social Change

An interdisciplinary approach to southern American culture, character, and life approached from the interrelated perspectives of history and culture (literature, music, religion, images, rituals, material culture). [3] (US) AMER1700W - Writing for Social ChangePractice of narrative, nonfiction writing for social change. History of American investigative journalism and scholarship. Interviewing, research, narrative and revision skills. [3] (HCA)

AMER1750W - Prison Writing in the USOn-campus course on prison writings. Centered on voices of incarcerated people in lockdown in the Secure Housing Unit. Daily living and struggles of incarceration. [3] (US)

AMER2100 - Sports, Culture, and SocietyMultifaceted role of sports in culture and society, past and present. Cross-cultural perspectives on U.S. sports and related practices. [3] (SBS)

AMER2175 - Conspiracy Culture in AmericaConspiracy theories in American culture and history. Topics include witch trials, anti-Semitism, anti-Catholicism, the red scare, UFOs, and the Kennedy assassination. Relation of conspiracy theories to broader cultures of knowledge. [3] (US)

AMER2204 - The U.S. StageIncluding British colonial and revolutionary drama; frontier theatre; melodrama; minstrelsy, vaudeville, burlesque, and the musical stage; pageantry and community theatre; postwar realism; African-American, Chicana/o, feminist, and Asian-American theatre movements. [3] (US)

AMER2500 - American Cultures: Past, Present, FutureAmerican cultural history from earliest contact between North American indigenous peoples and Europeans to the present. Popular norms and beliefs as well as literature, art, and philosophy. Ideas of exceptionalism, democracy, and the marketplace; struggles over inclusion and citizenship; and the U.S. role in globalization. [3]

AMER2700 - Religion, Politics, and American CulturePolitical role of religion and religious role of politics. Christian Nationalism; religious social activism; atheism in America; emergent religions and political resistance; immigration, religion, and community. [3] (US) AMER3007 - Religion Culture and Society

Political role of religion and religious role of politics. Christian Nationalism; religious social activism; atheism in America; emergent religions and political resistance; immigration, religion, and community. [3] (US) AMER3007 - Religion Culture and SocietyRelationships between cultural, political, and social dynamics and religion. How religions and spiritual practices shape cultures and are changed by them. Contexts and issues that arise from the religious and spiritual dimensions of human life. [3] (HCA)

AMER3100 - Rhetoric of Social MovementsThe role of communication in the creation, development, and function of social movements. The analysis of specific rhetorical acts. The study of the arguments, patterns of persuasion, and communication strategies of selected social movements. [3] (US)

Nashville-area Latinx community. Challenges faced by refugees, asylum seekers, and those livingundocumented in the United States. Rhetoric surrounding the permeability of the border, and the dangerous journeys made by asylum and opportunity seekers. U.S. foreign intervention; historical and current immigration polemics. Service-learning course. Offered on a graded basis only. Prerequisite: 3303. [3] (P)

Contemporary and historical views of the U.S. political and cultural presence in the world; comparative nationalisms; emphasis on points of view outside the U.S. [3] (US)Today's most intractable problems traverse national boundaries. Yet crises like COVID-19, global warming, and poverty also energize attempts to police borders, curtail migration, and tighten citizenship requirements. In this interdisciplinary course with guest appearances by activists, artists, and authors, we explore pressures on contemporary ideas about membership, boundaries, and belonging. [3] (HCA)

AMER3830 - Serving and LearningMeanings of and motives behind community service in the United States. The process of engagement inmeaningful service. Challenges in integrating service with academic coursework. A service-learning course. [3]

AMER3851 - Independent Readings and ResearchIndependent readings and/or research on approved topics relating to American society and culture. May be repeated for a total of 6 credits in 3851 and 3852 combined if there is no duplication in topic, but students may earn only up to 3 credits per semester of enrollment. [1-3; maximum of 6 credits total for all semesters of AMER

AMER3852 - Independent Readings and ResearchIndependent readings and/or research on approved topics relating to American society and culture. May be repeated for a total of 6 credits in 3851 and 3852 combined if there is no duplication in topic, but students may earn only up to 3 credits per semester of enrollment. [1-3; maximum of 6 credits total for all semesters of AMER

AMER3880 - Internship TrainingOffered on a pass/fail basis only and must be taken concurrently with 3881. Under faculty supervision, students intern in public or private organizations, conduct background research and reading, and submit a research paper at the end of the semester during which the internship training is complete. Background reading and research will be completed in 3881 concurrently with the completion of internship training, 3880; a minimum of 3 hours of 3881 must be completed, independent of hours taken in 3880. Corequisite: 3881. [Variable credit: 1-6] (No AXLE credit)

AMER3881 - Internship Readings and ResearchUnder faculty supervision, students intern in public or private organizations, conduct background research and reading, and submit a research paper at the end of the semester during which the internship training is completed. Background reading and research will be completed in 3881 concurrently with the completion of internship training, 3880; a minimum of 3 hours of 3881 must be completed, independent of hours taken in 3880. Corequisite: 3880. [3-6]. (No AXLE credit)

AMER3890 - Topics in American StudiesTopics vary. May be repeated for credit more than once if there is no duplication in topic. Students may enroll in more than one section of this course each semester. [3] (SBS)

AMER4000 - Research Methods WorkshopIssues, methodologies, traditions, approaches, and problems in the discipline. Limited to juniors and seniors with preference given to majors and minors. May be repeated for credit more than once if there is no duplication in topic. Students may enroll in more than one section of this course each semester. [3] (HCA)

AMER4100 - Undergraduate Seminar in American StudiesAdvanced reading, research, and writing in a particular area of American Studies. Limited to juniors and seniors with preference given to American Studies majors. May be repeated for credit once if there is no duplication in topic. Students may enroll in more than one section of this course each semester. [3; maximum of 6 credits total for all semesters of AMER 4100] (SBS)

AMER4960 - Senior ProjectA project conceived, developed, and completed under supervision of the American Studies faculty. Normally open only to senior American Studies majors. [3] (SBS)

AMER4998 - Senior Honors ResearchAcquisition, reading, and analysis of primary source research material. Open only to senior honors students. [3]

AMER4999 - Senior Honors ThesisWriting an honors thesis under the supervision of the thesis adviser. [3] (No AXLE credit)

ANTH1001 - Commons iSeminarTopics vary. General Elective credit only. [1] (No AXLE credit)

ANTH1101 - Introduction to Cultural AnthropologyThe study of diverse cultures in the contemporary world. The ways in which cultures have developed and changed. Intended for students with a general interest in the field of anthropology. [3] (SBS)

ANTH1111 - First-Year Writing SeminarIndependent learning and inquiry in an environment in which students can express knowledge and defend opinions through intensive class discussion, oral presentations, and written expression. May be repeated for credit once if there is no duplication of topic, but students may earn only up to 3 credits in any 1111 course per semester of enrollment. [3; maximum of 6 credits total for all semesters of 1111] (AXLE credit category varies by section)

ANTH1130W - America through the Lens of DisneyConcepts of gender, family, race, and class through a combination of texts and animated films produced by the Walt Disney Company. Impact on contemporary American cultural values. No credit for students who have earned credit for 1111 section 07. [3] (P)

ANTH1201 - Introduction to ArchaeologyArchaeological interpretation of global human history from early settled villages through the rise of the first civilizations. Archaeological methods and analysis, interpretive controversies, and cultural heritage.Environment, technology, religion, and human diversity in past cultural transformations. Rise of early cities and states. Repeat credit for students who earned credit for 1201W. [3] (SBS)

ANTH1201W - Introduction to ArchaeologyArchaeological interpretation of global human history from early settled villages through the rise of the first civilizations. Archaeological methods and analysis, interpretive controversies, and cultural heritage.Environment, technology, religion, and human diversity in past cultural transformations. Rise of early cities and states. Repeat credit for students who earned credit for 1201. [3] (SBS)

ANTH1301 - Introduction to Biological AnthropologyNatural selection and evolution of primates and humans. Theories on early human lifeways and behavior.Bioarchaeological and bioanthropological studies of past and present human health and disease. Evaluation of fossil, skeletal, molecular, and artifactual evidence in reconstructing the past. [3] (MNS)

ANTH1601 - Introduction to Language and CultureThe interrelationship between language and culture. Language and thought, language ideologies, discourse, and linguistic and social identities. Culture and language change. [3] (SBS)

ANTH2101 - Theories of CultureSurvey of the views of anthropological thinkers, from the late nineteenth century to the present, about the basic attributes of humankind and human culture. Comparison of different ideas of how people create culture and in turn are molded by culture. Repeat credit for students who have earned credit for 3900. [3] (SBS)

ANTH2102 - Problems in Anthropological TheorySeminar in anthropological theory: cultural evolution, cultural history, ethnic relations, cultural ecology, archaeological method and theory, social structure, political organizations, and religious institutions. Repeat credit for students who have earned credit for 3901. [3] (SBS)

ANTH2105 - Race in the AmericasOrigins of the concept of race. Comparison of past and present racial ideologies and practices in the United States, Latin America, and the Caribbean. The intersection of race with gender, ethnicity, class, nationalism, and colonialism. [3] (P)

ANTH2106 - Culture and Power in Latin AmericaSurvey of native cultures and Spanish and Portuguese heritage. Fundamental traditions, including marriage and the family, the relationship between men and women, racial and ethnic identity, social class, and religion.Peasant communities and contemporary urban life. [3] (INT)

ANTH2108 - Indigenous Peoples of Lowland South AmericaNative societies of Amazonia, the Orinoco basin, and other forest, savanna, and coastal regions of South America. Ecology, cosmology, social organization, and political relations in historical and contemporary populations. Government policies, human rights, environmentalism, sustainable development, and indigenous activism and advocacy. [3] (SBS)

ANTH2109 - Food Politics in AmericaThe cultural, social, political, and economic contexts of the contemporary food system. Issues of health and nutrition. Land use, ecological relations, food chains, and links to climate change. Ethics of food production, distribution, and consumption. Agricultural policy, immigration, work conditions, animal welfare, and local economies. Roles of citizens and consumers. Rise of movements seeking sustainable alternatives. [3] (US) ANTH2110 - Gender and Cultural Politics

The cultural, social, political, and economic contexts of the contemporary food system. Issues of health and nutrition. Land use, ecological relations, food chains, and links to climate change. Ethics of food production, distribution, and consumption. Agricultural policy, immigration, work conditions, animal welfare, and local economies. Roles of citizens and consumers. Rise of movements seeking sustainable alternatives. [3] (US) ANTH2110 - Gender and Cultural PoliticsCross-cultural comparison of women's roles and status in western and non-Western societies. Role of myths, symbols, and rituals in the formation of gender identities and the politics of sexual cooperation, conflict, and inequality. Case studies from Africa, the Middle East, Europe, North and South America, Asia, and Melanesia.Serves as repeat credit for ANTH 3145. [3] (P)

ANTH2113W - Food, Identity, and CultureFood in Western and non-Western cultures. Food, power, and the making of social beings. Taboos, cultural preferences, and sensory perceptions. Role of eating in social categories, boundaries, and the creation of self and other. Food fashion, globalization, and food in the media.[3] (INT)

ANTH2114 - Above and Below the Surface: The Caribbean between Climate Change and TourismCaribbean islands, history, tourism, and ecology. Human-environment interactions. Under water and above water ecologies; Scuba diving and environmental research. Development of interdisciplinary critical thought.Applied research. [3] (INT)

SpainPolitics of food, race, and identity in Spain. History of nationalism in Spain and Basque and Catalán separatism.ANTH2116W - Coffee: Biology, Culture, and Political EconomyCourse DescriptionCoffee from bean to cup. Plant biology and pharmacology, agricultural and economic dimensions, and taste and quality. Social and cultural implications of coffee trade and marketing, coffee shop cultures over time, and commodification and decommodification. [3] (SBS)

ANTH2116W - Coffee: Biology, Culture, and Political EconomyCoffee from bean to cup. Plant biology and pharmacology, agricultural and economic dimensions, and taste and quality. Social and cultural implications of coffee trade and marketing, coffee shop cultures over time, and commodification and decommodification. [3] (SBS)

ANTH2117W - Borders and Territories: The Making of Land and PeopleMigration, migrants, and the nature and making of borders, from inner cities to international and national borders. International migration and global capitalism. Border conflicts, nationalism, and territories. [3] (INT) ANTH2120 - Sports, Culture, and Society

Migration, migrants, and the nature and making of borders, from inner cities to international and national borders. International migration and global capitalism. Border conflicts, nationalism, and territories. [3] (INT) ANTH2120 - Sports, Culture, and SocietyMultifaceted role of sports in culture and society, past and present. Cross-cultural perspectives on U.S. sports and related practices. [3] (SBS)

ANTH2130 - Global Infrastructure and Everyday LifeRelations between infrastructure and society around the world, past and present. Analysis of large technical systems as sites of cultural meaning, political struggle, and everyday social interaction. Water, energy, communication, and transportation networks in Africa, Asia, and the Americas, with an emphasis on Latin America. Offered on a graded basis only. [3] (INT)

ANTH2140 - Quackonomics and the Effect of Duck Anthropology on Human History: The class where the ponds are our laboratories and breadcrumbs are our currency. We'll get our feathers wet learning about duck development, the history of ducks and their engagement with humans, impact on duck society, as well as the reverse impacts on gllbal human history [3]

ANTH2150 - Urban EcologyEnvironmental conditions and consequences of human and non-human life processes in cities through history.Transformations of landscapes, food systems, social inequality, and built environments. Origins of cities, gentrification, urban planning, green activism, and environmental justice. Long-term perspectives on climate change, political ecology, environmental history, green politics, and prospects for sustainability. [3] (SBS) ANTH2160 - Creating Community

Transformations of landscapes, food systems, social inequality, and built environments. Origins of cities, gentrification, urban planning, green activism, and environmental justice. Long-term perspectives on climate change, political ecology, environmental history, green politics, and prospects for sustainability. [3] (SBS) ANTH2160 - Creating CommunityCreation, maintenance, and transformation of communities through time. Community as a village or settlement, and as an "imagined" or virtual aspect of social identity. Behaviorist, interactionist, discursive, and identity-oriented anthropological approaches to community. Community organization and the built environment. Ancient and modern case studies. [3]

ANTH2160W - Creating CommunityCreation, maintenance, and transformation of communities through time. Community as a village or settlement, and as an "imagined" or virtual aspect of social identity. Behaviorist, interactionist, discursive, and identity-oriented anthropological approaches to community. Community organization and the built environment. Ancient and modern case studies. Serves as repeat credit for either 2160 or 3160 Anthropologies and Archaeologies of Community. [3] (SBS)

ANTH2170W - Contemporary Indigenous Cultures in Global ContextPresent-day global indigenous identities. Historical processes of colonialism, displacement, marginalization, and forced assimilation. Indigenous resistance and agency, indigenous social media, experiences of urban indigeneities, indigenous queer studies. Writing cyber-ethnography of influencers on social media platforms. [3]

ANTH2211 - ArchaeologyAn introduction to the methods used by archaeologists to study the nature and development of prehistoric societies. Approaches to survey, excavation, analysis, and interpretation are explored through lectures, case studies, and problem assignments. [3] (SBS)

ANTH2214 - Art and Architecture of the Ancient AmericasVisual arts and built environments of indigenous South America, North America, and the Caribbean prior to European contact. Sacred, cultural, and historical influences on architecture and iconography. [3] (INT) ANTH2220 - Human Landscapes

Visual arts and built environments of indigenous South America, North America, and the Caribbean prior to European contact. Sacred, cultural, and historical influences on architecture and iconography. [3] (INT) ANTH2220 - Human LandscapesHuman-environment interactions in the formation of landscapes and settlement systems. Uses of archaeology, cultural anthropology, and cross-cultural comparison to understand social space, sacred landscapes, urban plans, and historical ecology. Methods of interpretation through quantitative, social, and symbolic analysis.Repeat credit for students who earned credit for 2220W. [3] (SBS)

ANTH2220W - Human LandscapesHuman-environment interactions in the formation of landscapes and settlement systems. Uses of archaeology, cultural anthropology, and cross-cultural comparison to understand social space, sacred landscapes, urban plans, and historical ecology. Methods of interpretation through quantitative, social, and symbolic analysis.Repeat credit for students who earned credit for 2220. [3] (SBS)

ANTH2221 - Old World ArchaeologyAncient Cultures of the Old World. Archaeology of the Near East, Africa, Asia, and Oceania. The origins of the great civilizations of Egypt and Mesopotamia. The beginnings of cities, agriculture, trade, and empires in light of recent archaeological discoveries. [3] (INT)

ANTH2222 - North American ArchaeologyThe origins of native North American culture. Migration from Asia, early hunters and gatherers, and the extinction of ancient fauna. Evolution of social complexity, ecological adaptations, and prehistoric interaction as seen in the archaeological record of the continent. [3] (US)

ANTH2223 - Native North AmericansIndian societies of North America; their archaeological origins, development, and changing adaptation to white society. [3] (US)

ANTH2224 - Cultural Resource Management; Applied Archaeology in the United StatesHistory, legislation, methods, and stakeholders involved in Cultural Resource Management (CRM).Archaeological and historic preservation research under federal, state, and local laws. Knowledge and skills needed for a career in CRM. Archaeological fieldwork and field trips to local archaeological sites. Suitable for Immersion projects. Prerequisite: 1201. [3] (SBS)

ANTH2225 - Climate Change, Collapse, and Sustainability in HistoryThe Holocene until 1600 AD. Archaeological perspectives on human society and relation to the environment over time. Historical ecology, anthropogenic climate change, domestication, colonial ecosystems,environmental justice. Case studies of cultures and peoples: Maya, Easter Island, Andes, Norse, American Southwest. Application of ancient innovations to address present concerns. [3] (P)

ANTH2226W - Modern-World ArchaeologyHistorical archaeology, investigation of the post-1500 world, origins of modernity, and global networks.Colonialism, capitalism, racialization, and Eurocentrism. Social inequality. Structural history, network theory, world-systems analysis, dialectical thinking, epochal structures, microhistory, material culture, and socio-spatial analysis. [3] (SBS)

ANTH2227 - Food in the Ancient WorldDevelopment of agriculture from around 8,000 BCE to the contact between Old and New Worlds in 1492. Role of foodways in human societies and impact on historical and environmental change. Integration of foodways with social and cultural systems such as gender, identity, ideology, and trade. Elements of historical cuisines, including cooking techniques, meat, and alcohol. Excursions to local sites of agricultural, archaeological, and food-related relevance. [3] (SBS)

ANTH2228W - The Green Planet: Plants in Human HistoryPlants and the political economy, colonialism, and history of science, including history of archaeological theory.Environmental reconstruction, archaeological methods for reconstructing human-plant interaction. Introduction to botany: taxonomy, systematics, evolution. Introduction to paleobotany: food processing, diet, microbotany.Naturalism, equilibrium, and archaeological theory. Human-plant interaction in the ancient world; future farming. Offered on a graded basis only. [3] (P)

ANTH2229 - Contested Ground: Sacred Sites Across the Ancient WorldSacred places and structures from the Paleolithic to the medieval period. Comparisons of religious sites worldwide. Emphasis on cCultural heritage and the historical and contemporary politics of ancient religious sites.[3] (P)

ANTH2229w - Contested Ground: Sacred Sites Across the Ancient WorldSacred places and structures from the Paleolithic to the medieval period. Comparisons of religious sites worldwide. Emphasis on cCultural heritage and the historical and contemporary politics of ancient religious sites.[3] (P)

ANTH2230 - South American ArchaeologyFrom 12,000 years ago to the present. Archaeology, ethnohistory, and ethnography. [3] (SBS)

ANTH2231 - Ancient Andean CivilizationsIntroduction to the archaeology and peoples of ancient South America. Early hunters and gatherers, origins of agriculture and urbanism, and the rise and fall of the Huari and Inca empires. [3] (INT)

ANTH2242 - The Archaeology of Ancient Maya CivilizationCase study in cultural evolution. Archaeological evidence and social theory on the enigmatic origins, complex nature, and sudden collapse of the ancient Maya civilization. Repeat credit for students who have earned credit for 2242W. [3] (INT)

ANTH2242W - The Archaeology of Ancient Maya CivilizationCase study in cultural evolution. Archaeological evidence of and social theory on the enigmatic origins, complex nature, and sudden collapse of the ancient Maya civilization. Repeat credit for students who have earned credit for 2242. [3] (INT)

ANTH2250 - Contemporary Middle East and KurdistanFrom Ottoman and Safavid empires to Syria, Turkey, Iran, and Iraq. Kurds, Kurdish history, and the Middle East.Nationalism, Kurdish ethnicity, and uprisings; Kurdish politics across four nation-states. Kurdish community in Nashville. [3] (INT)

ANTH2275 - Untimely People and MattersTime's effects on people and societies. Culturally constituted temporalities; notions of embodiment and alterity.Study of social change; process of innovation through invention and adaptation. Othering non-Western societies as traditional and unchanging. [3] (HCA)

ANTH2275W - Untimely People and MattersTime's effects on people and societies. Culturally constituted temporalities; notions of embodiment and alterity.Study of social change; process of innovation through invention and adaptation. Othering non-Western societies as traditional and unchanging. [3] (HCA)

ANTH2342 - Biology of InequalityANTH2370 - Death and the BodyCourse DescriptionCross-cultural study of death rituals. Mortuary archaeology and anthropology of death and the body. Biological and social perspectives on the corpse and living body, and their treatment in ritual and everyday life. The body as biological specimen and social artifact. Nature of beauty, body modification, and adornment. [3] (SBS) ANTH2371 - Reading the Bones: Bioarchaeology and Forensic Studies in the Peruvian Andes

ANTH2370 - Death and the BodyCross-cultural study of death rituals. Mortuary archaeology and anthropology of death and the body. Biological and social perspectives on the corpse and living body, and their treatment in ritual and everyday life. The body as biological specimen and social artifact. Nature of beauty, body modification, and adornment. [3] (SBS) ANTH2371 - Reading the Bones: Bioarchaeology and Forensic Studies in the Peruvian Andes

Cross-cultural study of death rituals. Mortuary archaeology and anthropology of death and the body. Biological and social perspectives on the corpse and living body, and their treatment in ritual and everyday life. The body as biological specimen and social artifact. Nature of beauty, body modification, and adornment. [3] (SBS) ANTH2371 - Reading the Bones: Bioarchaeology and Forensic Studies in the Peruvian AndesMaymester: Two weeks on campus followed by field and lab work in rural Peru. Analysis of archaeological mummies and skeletons. Bioarchaeology and forensics. Archaeological site visits and museum tours in Lima and Arequipa. [3] (INT)

ANTH2375 - Making Racism Visible: Media and Civil Rights from MLK to Black Lives MatterAfrican American, American Indian, and intersectional racial justice movements from 1950 to present. Role of mass media, documentary film, and social media in political struggles for racial justice in the United States. [3]

ANTH2380W - Latinx/AfroLatinx Ethnographies: The (Un)Making of LatinidadesSocial histories and contemporary lives of groups often attributed Latinidad through ethnographic texts. Issues of Whiteness, anti-Blackness and anti-Indigeneity with(in) Latinidad. History of "Black and Latino" solidarity.Nation, diaspora, citizenship, race, ethnicity, culture. Afro-Latinidad(es), New Afro-Latinx Movement. Rise of social movements seeking political and social alternatives. Serves as repeat credit for ANTH 3890, section 03 in spring 2023. [3](P)

ANTH2381W - The Clothes We Wear: Textiles, Clothing and Fashion in a Global WorldIntroduction to an anthropology of textiles, dress, and fashion. Material culture; textile production and consumption in the global world. [3] (INT)

ANTH2385W - (Re)Imagining Education: Ethnography of Schools and SchoolingRole of schools and schooling in (re)producing and resisting educational inequities. Ethnography, ethnographic methods, participant observation. Schools and the (re)production of categories of race, ethnicity, gender, class.Rise of movements to (re)imagine school/schooling. Serves as repeat credit for ANTH 3890, section 04 in Spring 2023. [3] (P)

ANTH2400 - Public Health, Language, Media, and Risk ManagementRole of language in the politics and ethics of expert, government, and community stakeholder responses to epidemics, environmental pollution, and natural disasters. Theory and case studies of communication in U.S.and global crises. Uses of science, narrative, and metaphor in formation of health policy and health inequalities based in race, ethnicity, sexuality, and geographic marginalization. [3] (P)

ANTH2601 - Introduction to LinguisticsSystematic study and analysis of human language. Formation of language sounds, sound systems, the structure of words, the structure of sentences, meaning, language change. Data from diverse languages of the world. [3]

ANTH2602 - The Social life of LanguageStudy of language in cultural social contexts; methods of linguistic inquiry; linguistic analysis as tool for ethnographic investigation. Language in global and local contexts. Serves as repeat credit for students who completed 2602W. [3] (SBS)

ANTH2602W - The Social life of LanguageStudy of language in cultural social contexts; methods of linguistic inquiry; linguistic analysis as tool for ethnographic investigation. Language in global and local contexts. Serves as repeat credit for students who completed 2602. [3] (SBS)

ANTH2603 - Comparative Writing SystemsThe origins, development, and social uses of writing in the ancient Middle East, Mediterranean, andMesoamerica. Decipherments of hieroglyphic systems. Literacy, historiography, and cross-cultural translation.[3] (HCA)

ANTH2800 - Theatre and Social Change: Theatre as Applied ActivismRole of theatre in social justice and social change movements, including Playback Theatre and Theatre of the Oppressed. Conducting improv theatre in class or in collaboration with a local / campus organization. Not open to students who have earned credit for 3890 section 05 offered spring 2020. [3] (HCA)

ANTH3050 - A.I. and Material CultureApplying artificial intelligence to archaeology. Statistics, machine learning, and deep learning. Hands-on examples from archaeological excavations as well as laboratory studies. [3] (HCA)

ANTH3120 - Sociocultural Field MethodsResearch design and proposal writing, access to data, ethical issues, sampling techniques, interviewing questionnaire design and question writing, data analysis. [3] (SBS)

ANTH3121 - Global Wealth and PovertyThe production of inequality. How wealth is accumulated, lost, exchanged, and displayed; how poverty is created, endured, and overcome. Explanations in terms of luck, hard work, immorality, occult forces, and public policies. Case studies. [3] (P)

ANTH3122 - The Anthropology of GlobalizationPerspectives on globalization based on ethnographic case studies. The impact of new technologies on native cultures; different cultural meanings of global commodities; creation of new diaspora cultures; effects of neoliberal reforms on local economies; ethnic movements and terror networks. [3] (INT)

ANTH3125 - Public Scholarship Practicum in Community ResearchTheory and methods for publicizing research to policy makers, organizations, and the public. Uses of media.Communicating research in civil rights; environmentalism; and advocacy on gender, sexuality, health, and religion. Translating original scholarship into pieces for newspapers, blogs, websites, video resources, and public presentations. Prior research experience is expected. Consent of instructor is required. [3] (No AXLE credit) ANTH3130 - Andean Culture and Society

Communicating research in civil rights; environmentalism; and advocacy on gender, sexuality, health, and religion. Translating original scholarship into pieces for newspapers, blogs, websites, video resources, and public presentations. Prior research experience is expected. Consent of instructor is required. [3] (No AXLE credit) ANTH3130 - Andean Culture and SocietyHistorical and archaeological background, languages, economy, environment, and cultural adaptation of Andean peoples. Spanish and native American heritage. Religion, family structure, political organization, contemporary social issues, and economic background. Urban and rural traditions, social movements, and change. [3] (SBS) ANTH3132 - Social Movements

Historical and archaeological background, languages, economy, environment, and cultural adaptation of Andean peoples. Spanish and native American heritage. Religion, family structure, political organization, contemporary social issues, and economic background. Urban and rural traditions, social movements, and change. [3] (SBS) ANTH3132 - Social MovementsCollective action, past and present. Class- and identity-based movements, transnational activism, and networks.The early U.S. labor movement; 1960s gay, women's and civil rights movements. Global struggles for social justice. [3] (INT)

ANTH3133 - Political Anthropology: States and Their SecretsDevelopment, workings, and techniques of the ancient and modern state. Bureaucracy, state secrecy,diplomacy, organization of warfare, surveillance. Anthropological theories of power, state formation, nationalism, authority, influence, and coercion. Case studies of atrocities, disclosure of secrets, and whistleblowing. Ethics and responsibility in complex power structures. [3] (SBS)

ANTH3134 - Human Rights of Indigenous PeoplesMajor concepts and legal frameworks for indigenous self-governance, cultural rights, and environmental stewardship. Local and transnational indigenous rights movements. [3] (P)

ANTH3135 - Development, Social Enterprise, Social JusticeTheories of economic and human development. Multidimensional approaches to poverty and well-being. Roles of inequality, discrimination, and social justice. Practical focus on social entrepreneurship in international context. [3] (P)

ANTH3136 - Cultural Heritage in Context: The Future of the PastANTH3138 - Global Food PoliticsCourse DescriptionEcological, political, economic, and cultural dynamics in the world food system. Historical and contemporary agricultural methods. Energy, land use, and climate change. Public health and nutrition. Hunger, food scarcity, and biotechnologies. Commodity chains and labor conditions. Movements for food security, food sovereignty, fair trade, and consumer information. [3] (INT)

ANTH3138 - Global Food PoliticsEcological, political, economic, and cultural dynamics in the world food system. Historical and contemporary agricultural methods. Energy, land use, and climate change. Public health and nutrition. Hunger, food scarcity, and biotechnologies. Commodity chains and labor conditions. Movements for food security, food sovereignty, fair trade, and consumer information. [3] (INT)

ANTH3140 - Myth, Ritual, Belief: The Anthropology of ReligionCross-cultural survey of religious and ritual beliefs in light of theories of religion. Topics include sacrifice, myth, witchcraft, divination, religious change, and millenarian movements. [3] (HCA)

ANTH3141 - Anthropology of HealingRitual, symbols, belief, and emotion in health, illness, and therapeutic processes. Practices and politics of healing in western and non-western societies, including shamanism, faith healing, ecstatic religious experience, alternative medicine, and biomedicine. Mind-body interactions, medical pluralism, relations between patients and healers, and implications for improving medical care. [3] (P)

ANTH3143 - Medical AnthropologyBiocultural aspects of human adaptations to health, disease, and nutrition. Non-Western medical and psychiatric systems. Effects of cultures on the interpretation, diagnosis, and treatment of illness. Case studies from Africa, Oceania, Latin America, and the contemporary United States. [3] (SBS)

ANTH3144 - Politics of Reproductive HealthReproductive health politics, with focus on the United States. Role of broader social, economic, and cultural concerns in diverse positions and public debates. How sexuality, race, class, gender, and disability shape experiences of conception, pregnancy, childbirth, kinship, and new medical technologies. [3] (P)

ANTH3145 - Sexuality, Gender, and CultureTheories and case studies of sexuality and gender in Western and non-Western societies. Cross-cultural perspectives on how class, race, ethnicity, culture, and power influence sexual norms and gender roles.Performativity; masculinity and femininity; kinship; religion and sexuality. Serves as repeat credit for ANTH2110. [3] (P)

ANTH3150 - Cognitive AnthropologyMethods and approaches in linguistics and cognitive sciences. Exploration of culture and thought, and how culture affects our ways of reasoning, thinking, and behavior. Repeat credit for students who completed 3150W.[3] (SBS)

ANTH3150W - Cognitive AnthropologyMethods and approaches in linguistics and cognitive sciences. Exploration of culture and thought, and how culture affects our ways of reasoning, thinking, and behavior. Repeat credit for students who completed 3150.[3] (SBS)

ANTH3161 - Colonial Encounters in the AmericasTheoretical discussion of colonialism as a sociocultural process. Comparative colonialism in pre- and post-Hispanic contexts. Methodological consideration of archaeological and archival analyses and theircomplementary epistemological statuses. Pan-American case studies. [3] (SBS)

ANTH3162 - Material Culture of New World SlaveryEnslaved Africans' lives in the New World from an archaeological perspective. Housing, artifacts, health, religion, and resistance in North America, South America, and the Caribbean. Serves as repeat credit for students who earned credit for ANTH 3890-01 in Fall 2014. [3] (SBS)

ANTH3200 - Ancient CitiesComparative examination of early cities in the Old World and pre-Columbian America. Analysis of social and economic processes supporting preindustrial urbanism. Role of geography, ideology, trade, and settlement systems in the rise of early urban societies. [3] (SBS)

ANTH3202 - The Collapse of CivilizationsCauses of the decline or collapse of complex societies. Old World and New World examples. Historical, anthropological, and paleoecological theories and controversies. [3] (P)

ANTH3240 - Ancient Mesoamerican CivilizationsDevelopment of pre-Hispanic civilization in Mesoamerica from the beginnings of village life to the rise of the great states and empires: Olmec, Maya, Toltec, and Aztec civilizations. [3] (INT)

ANTH3241 - The AztecsOrigins of the Aztec peoples of central Mexico and their culture; history and structure of the Aztec empire; pre-Columbian social, political, and economic organization; warfare and religion; the Spanish conquest; colonial society in central Mexico; ethno-graphic study of modern descendants of the Aztecs. [3] (INT)

ANTH3243 - Ancient Maya Gods and RulersPolitics and religion in Classic Maya culture, 100-1000 C.E. Sources and symbols of power, ritual life, and metaphysical underpinnings of hierarchy and cosmology. Relationships among ideology, religion, and politics.Repeat credit for students who have earned credit for 3243W. [3] (SBS)

ANTH3243W - Ancient Maya Gods and RulersPolitics and religion in Classic Maya culture, 100-1000 C.E. Sources and symbols of power, ritual life, and metaphysical underpinnings of hierarchy and cosmology. Relationships among ideology, religion, and politics.Repeat credit for students who have earned credit for 3243. [3] (SBS)

ANTH3250 - The Inca EmpireThe rise and fall of the Inca state in the Southern American Andes. Inca society, agriculture, economy, warfare, ancestor worship, mummies, and royal wealth. Imperial expansion, the role of the feasting in Inca politics, and place of ecology in Inca religion. Destruction of the empire during the Spanish conquest; persistence of pre-Columbian culture among Inca descendants in Peru and Bolivia. [3] (INT)

ANTH3260 - Crafting Pottery in the Ancient WorldPottery as craft or locally-grounded knowledge of making. Phenomenological issues of perception,objectification, and embodiment. Practice-based versus formal textbook learning. Hands-on experience making and studying ceramic vessels. Qualitative and quantitative analysis of ceramic forms, fabrics, and decorations.Repeat credit for students who have earned credit for 3260W. [3] (HCA)

ANTH3260W - Crafting Pottery in the Ancient WorldPottery as craft or locally-grounded knowledge of making. Phenomenological issues of perception,objectification, and embodiment. Practice-based versus formal textbook learning. Hands-on experience making and studying ceramic vessels. Qualitative and quantitative analysis of ceramic forms, fabrics, and decorations.Repeat credit for students who have earned credit for 3260. [3] (HCA)

ANTH3261 - Introduction to Geographic Information Systems and Remote SensingComputerized graphics and statistical procedures to recognize and analyze spatial patterning. Spatial data-collection, storage and retrieval; spatial analysis and graphic output of map features. Integration of satellite imagery with data from other sources through hands-on experience. Assumes basic knowledge of computer hardware and software. [3] (MNS)

ANTH3262 - Ethics in Anthropology, Archaeology, and DevelopmentEthical perspectives on contemporary problems of archaeological and anthropological research, interaction, and interpretation of past and present non-Western societies. [3] (P)

ANTH3270 - Underwater and Maritime ArchaeologyHistory, theory, and methodology in underwater, marine, and nautical archaeology. Technologies for survey, excavation, and analysis. Cultures past and present, impacts of climate change, and connections to marine resources in the present. [3] (INT)

ANTH3333 - TopicsTopics vary by section and instructor. May be repeated for credit; students may register for more than one section of this course in the same semester. [3]

ANTH3333W - TopicsTopics vary by section and instructor. [3]

ANTH3343 - Biology and Culture of RaceBiological and cultural perspectives on race in the United States and internationally. Patterns of human genetic variation. Biomedical use of racial categories. Social and cultural construction of race. Racism and racial discrimination. Racial disparities in health. [3] (P)

ANTH3344 - Genetic Anthropology Lab TechniquesApplications of molecular anthropology techniques. DNA data analysis. Genetic methods and findings. DNA comparisons between world populations. Studies of ancient DNA. [3] (MNS)

ANTH3345 - Genetics in SocietyInfluence of modern genetic technologies in everyday life. Social meanings of scientific data. Genetics of identity. Personalized genetic medicine and consumer-driven genetic testing. Genetics of food production.Assisted reproductive technologies. Revolutionary societal impacts of science. Offered on a graded basis only.[3] (P)

ANTH3346 - Human Adaptation and DiseaseEvolutionary perspectives on biological and cultural adaptations to physical and pathogen environments. Human variation, human evolutionary ecology, epidemiology, and evolution of disease. Specific focus onepidemiological transitions. Offered on a graded basis only. Serves as repeat credit for ANTH 3890-02 in Fall 2016. [3] (MNS)

ANTH3347 - Bioethics in AnthropologyHumans as study subjects in research. Human complexities and experimentation; eugenics; and ethical, legal, and social issues of research. [3] (SBS)

ANTH3371 - Social and Health Consequences of PandemicsOrigins, spread, mortality, and the biological and social consequences. The epidemic of bubonic plague in the 1300s, known as the European Black Death. The devastation of indigenous New World populations by European diseases after 1492. Social and medical responses. Implications for modern societies. [3] (SBS)

ANTH3372 - Human OsteologyAnatomy of the human skeleton. Determination of age, sex, stature, and biological affinity from bones and dentition. Analysis of archaeological skeletal remains for diagnosis of disease and identification of cultural practices. Use of human remains in criminal investigation. [3] (MNS)

ANTH3401W - Evolutionary Biology of Women (Womxn)Female and womxn's reproductive biology from an evolutionary and biocultural perspective. Life history phases including puberty, pregnancy, birth, lactation, and menopause. Evolutionary theory and human behavioral ecology. How environmental and cultural factors shape biological expression and experiences. [3] (MNS) ANTH3620 - Maya Language and Literature

Female and womxn's reproductive biology from an evolutionary and biocultural perspective. Life history phases including puberty, pregnancy, birth, lactation, and menopause. Evolutionary theory and human behavioral ecology. How environmental and cultural factors shape biological expression and experiences. [3] (MNS) ANTH3620 - Maya Language and LiteratureIntroduction to a contemporary Maya language. Linguistic analysis and cultural concepts. By permission of instructor. May be repeated for the study of different Maya languages for a total of 6 credits. Repeat credit for students who completed 3620W. [1-6; maximum of 6 credits total for all semesters of ANTH 221] (No AXLE

ANTH3622 - Classic Maya Language and HieroglyphsLinguistic analysis of Classic Maya hieroglyphs, 100-1000 C.E. Methods of decipherment reading andinterpreting an ancient script. Role of socioeconomic status in literacy. Repeat credit for students who completed 3622W. [3] (SBS)

ANTH3622W - Classic Maya Language and HieroglyphsLinguistic analysis of Classic Maya hieroglyphs, 100-1000 C.E. Methods of decipherment reading andinterpreting an ancient script. Role of socioeconomic status in literacy. Repeat credit for students who completed 3622. [3] (SBS)

ANTH3850 - Independent ResearchReadings on selected topics (of the student's choice) and the preparation of reports. [1-3] (No AXLE credit) ANTH3851 - Independent Research

Readings on selected topics (of the student's choice) and the preparation of reports. [1-3] (No AXLE credit) ANTH3851 - Independent ResearchReadings on selected topics (of the student's choice) and the preparation of reports. [1-3] (No AXLE credit) ANTH3860W - Research Design

Readings on selected topics (of the student's choice) and the preparation of reports. [1-3] (No AXLE credit) ANTH3860W - Research DesignANTH3865 - Field ResearchCourse DescriptionDirected field research on topics of the student's choice. May be repeated for credit more than once if there is no duplication in topic, but students may earn only up to 6 credits per semester of enrollment. [1-6] (No AXLE

ANTH3865 - Field ResearchDirected field research on topics of the student's choice. May be repeated for credit more than once if there is no duplication in topic, but students may earn only up to 6 credits per semester of enrollment. [1-6] (No AXLE

ANTH3866 - Archaeological ExcavationExcavation techniques and field recording methods through participation in an archaeological dig. Excavation unit layout, digging techniques, feature and artifact identification. Mapping and field instrumentation. Data registry, statistical analysis, artifact curation, and conservation. Stratigraphy, relative and absolute dating, sampling strategies and techniques, data management. Research design and archaeological ethics. [4] (MNS) ANTH3867 - Digital Archaeology: Analysis and Curation of Material Culture

Excavation techniques and field recording methods through participation in an archaeological dig. Excavation unit layout, digging techniques, feature and artifact identification. Mapping and field instrumentation. Data registry, statistical analysis, artifact curation, and conservation. Stratigraphy, relative and absolute dating, sampling strategies and techniques, data management. Research design and archaeological ethics. [4] (MNS) ANTH3867 - Digital Archaeology: Analysis and Curation of Material CultureLaboratory analysis of archaeological artifacts using digital methods. Three dimensional modeling of artifacts, digital photography, artifact technical diagramming. Virtual Reality and other representational frameworks. PXRFcompositional analysis. Artifact cleaning, labeling, and preservation techniques. Assemblage curation and integration with databases. Preparation of artifacts for exhibition. Ethics of curation, representation, repatriation.Offered on a graded basis only. [3] (MNS)

ANTH3868 - Introduction to Archaeological ScienceStudy of the human past applying methods from geography, physics, earth sciences, and biological sciences.Integrated interdisciplinary approaches and hands-on learning to conduct scientific projects with STEM research, conceptualize research questions, and implement a variety of research methods and techniques. Oriented to students from Social Sciences and Humanities. [3] (MNS)

ANTH3880 - Internship TrainingOffered on a Pass/Fail basis only and must be taken concurrently with 3881. Hours of 3880 will not count toward the Anthropology major or minor. Students from any discipline can gain experience working with a local, national, or international organization in developing a project to broaden their understanding of anthropological issues. Hours for background readings and research will be completed in ANTH 3881 concurrently with and regardless of the numbers of hours taken in internship training in 3880. Normally a 2.90 grade point average, 6hours of prior work in ANTH, and prior approval of the student's plan by the director of undergraduate studies in Anthropology are required. A research paper and report must be submitted at the end of the semester during which the internship training is completed. Corequisite: 3881. [Variable credit: 1-9] (No AXLE credit) ANTH3881 - Internship Readings and Research

hours of prior work in ANTH, and prior approval of the student's plan by the director of undergraduate studies in Anthropology are required. A research paper and report must be submitted at the end of the semester during which the internship training is completed. Corequisite: 3881. [Variable credit: 1-9] (No AXLE credit) ANTH3881 - Internship Readings and ResearchReadings and research conducted under the supervision of a member of the Anthropology department and a substantial research paper are required. Students from any discipline can gain experience working with a local, national, or international organization in developing a project to broaden their understanding of anthropological issues. Hours for background readings and research will be completed in ANTH 3881 concurrently with and regardless of the numbers of hours taken in internship training in 3880. Normally a 2.90 grade point average, 6ANTH3890 - Special TopicsCourse DescriptionTopics vary. May be repeated for credit more than once if there is no duplication in topic. Students may enroll in more than one section of this course each semester. [3] (No AXLE credit)

ANTH3890 - Special TopicsTopics vary. May be repeated for credit more than once if there is no duplication in topic. Students may enroll in more than one section of this course each semester. [3] (No AXLE credit)

ANTH4120 - The Archaeology of Agriculture: A Technological ApproachAgricultural technologies and their impacts on socio-environmental transformations through time in the Andes and elsewhere. Theories of technology emergence and innovation, path dependence, actor network theory, resilience, and antifragility models. Classic works on agriculture, smallholder farmers, intensification, and landscape capital. Interdisciplinary approaches and policy perspectives on farming, ecosystem services, and agroecosystems. [3] (INT)

ANTH4152 - Activism and Social Change: Theory, Experience, and PracticeIntroduction to theory and ethics of social activism and advocacy. Roles of academics and scholars. Theories of political organizing and mobilization. Application of anthropological research methods. Case studies in local, national, and global social issues, processes of civic mobilization, and social change. [3] (SBS)

ANTH4153 - Economic AnthropologyModern and postmodern cultural organization of Western and non-Western economies. Crosscultural comparison of concepts of self-interest and rationality. Relation of the growth of post-industrial (service and information) economies to economic strategies of ethnic groups. Survey of indigenous alternatives to development.Theoretical issues grounded in case studies from our own and other cultures. [3] (SBS)

ANTH4154 - Environmental AnthropologyThe relationship between human beings and the environments that sustain them. Global diversity of human ecological adaptations. Hunter-gatherers, pastoral nomads, slash-and-burn agriculturalists, and irrigation agriculturalists. Human impact on the environment. Theories of human ecological interaction. [3] (SBS) ANTH4155 - Realities and Worldviews: Why Culture Matters

The relationship between human beings and the environments that sustain them. Global diversity of human ecological adaptations. Hunter-gatherers, pastoral nomads, slash-and-burn agriculturalists, and irrigation agriculturalists. Human impact on the environment. Theories of human ecological interaction. [3] (SBS) ANTH4155 - Realities and Worldviews: Why Culture MattersWorldviews and constructed realities that influence human behavior. Stereotyping and conflict as triggered by ontological misunderstandings. Western ontology, science, and understanding the Other. Interaction of worldviews and human behavior such as in resource management and public health. Offered on a graded basis only. [3] (SBS)

ANTH4156 - Racial Experience and PoliticsPolitics in liberal democracies. Intellectual history and theory of racial experience; ethnographic studies of peoples' experience of race in everyday life; global and cross-cultural perspectives on processes of racialization.[3] (P)

ANTH4160 - Research Methods WorkshopIssues, methodologies, traditions, approaches, and problems in the discipline. Limited to juniors and seniors with preference given to majors and minors. May be repeated for credit more than once if there is no duplication in topic. Students may enroll in more than one section of this course each semester. [3] (HCA)

ANTH4201W - Origins of Social InequalityGlobal and archaeological perspective on how human beings have understood social differences over time.Contributing factors to the emergence of inequality. [3] (P)

ANTH4345 - Human Evolutionary GeneticsCore issues in human evolution and population genetics. Molecular evidence for the origin of modern humans, reconstruction of human migrations, race, and detection of admixture between populations. Implications for human disease. Offered on a graded basis only. Prerequisite or corequisite: BSCI 1100, BSCI 1105, or BSCI 1510. [3] (MNS)

ANTH4373 - Health and Disease in Ancient PopulationsPaleopathology of mummies and skeletons. Skeletal evidence for violence and warfare. Gender and social status differences in diet, disease, and activity patterns to reconstruct ancient social organization. Biological relationships among ancient and modern populations. Ethics and federal law in the study of human remains.Laboratory analysis of skeletons. [3] (MNS)

ANTH4998 - Honors ResearchResearch to be done in consultation with a member of the faculty in anthropology. Open only to those beginning honors work in anthropology. May be repeated for a total of 6 credits. [1-6; maximum of 6 credits total for all semesters of 4998] (No AXLE credit)

ANTH4999 - Honors ThesisOpen only to seniors in the departmental honors program. Students completing this course with distinction, including a thesis and final examination, will earn honors in anthropology. Prerequisite: 4998. May be repeated for a total of 6 credits if there is no duplication in topic. [1-6; maximum of 6 credits total for all semesters of 4999] (No AXLE credit)

ARA1101 - Elementary ArabicDevelopment of reading, listening, speaking, and writing skills. No credit for students who have earned credit for a more advanced Arabic language course. [5] (No AXLE credit)

ARA1102 - Elementary ArabicContinuation of 1101. Development of reading, listening, speaking, and writing skills. No credit for students who have earned credit for a more advanced Arabic language course. Prerequisite: 1101. [5] (INT)

ARA2201 - Intermediate ArabicPractice and development of language skills at the intermediate-advanced level. Intensive work in spoken Arabic with emphasis on vocabulary acquisition, reading comprehension, and writing skills. Advanced grammar, modern Arabic word formation, verb aspect usage, and structure of complex sentences. No credit for students who have earned credit for a more advanced Arabic language course. Prerequisite: 1102. [3] (INT)

ARA2202 - Intermediate ArabicContinuation of 2201. Practice and development of language skills at the intermediate-advanced level. Intensive work in spoken Arabic with emphasis on vocabulary acquisition, reading comprehension, and writing skills.Advanced grammar, modern Arabic word formation, verb aspect usage, and structure of complex sentences. No credit for students who have earned credit for a more advanced Arabic language course. Prerequisite: 2201. [3]

ARA3101 - Advanced ArabicFurther development of listening, reading, speaking, and writing skills in the Arabic language. Emphasis on grammar and literary techniques. Offered on a graded basis only. No credit for students who have earned credit for a more advanced Arabic language course. Prerequisite: 2202. [3] (INT)

ARA3102 - Advanced ArabicContinuation of 3101. Further development of listening, reading, speaking, and writing skills in the Arabic language. Emphasis on grammar and literary techniques. Offered on a graded basis only. No credit for students who have earned credit for a more advanced Arabic language course. Prerequisite: 3101. [3] (INT)

ARA3201 - Media ArabicListening to, discussing, simulating, and analyzing Arabic media materials. Coverage of current and historical events, such as TV broadcasts, headline news, documentaries, and public discussions on political, religious, and cultural issues. Offered on a graded basis only. Prerequisite: 3102. [3] (INT)

ARA3211 - Advanced Seminar in ArabicAnalysis of style and forms. Poetry, novels, popular literature, and historical chronicles. Topics vary. May be repeated for credit more than once if there is no duplication in topic. Students may enroll in more than one section of this course each semester. Prerequisite: 3102. [3] (HCA)

ARA3301 - Arabic of the Qur'an and Other Classical TextsSyntactical and morphological features of Classical Arabic. Differences and similarities with Modern Standard Arabic in vocabulary usage, semantic extensions, and context. Vocabulary borrowing. Texts drawn from the Qur'an, Hadith, and Sira (biographical) literature. [3] (INT)

ARAM2400 - Introduction to Classical SyriacScript and basic grammar. Historical context of language as Aramaic dialect. Simple readings from Syriac translations of Christian and Jewish scripture. [3] (INT)

ARAM2500 - Egyptian AramaicReading 5th century BCE texts from the Jewish community at Elephantine. Papyri and ostraca. Historical, linguistic, and cultural context. Relationship to Biblical tradition. [3] (INT)

ARTS1001 - Commons iSeminarTopics vary. General Elective credit only. [1] (No AXLE Credit)

ARTS1099 - Maymester Contemporary Art BlitzIntensive review of contemporary art through excursions to museums, galleries, and artists' studios. Insights from curators, dealers, and films. Cities vary each year. May be repeated for credit more than once if there is no duplication in topic. [3] (HCA)

ARTS1101 - Introduction to Studio ArtProcesses, fundamental elements, and principles of art. Drawing, painting, printmaking, sculpture, photography, installation, and time-based art. [3] (HCA)

ARTS1102 - Drawing and Composition IIntroduction to drawing: visual problems related to observation, idea formation, composition, media, and various forms of expression. Figure and landscape may be included. [3] (HCA)

ARTS1103 - Drawing From LifeMethods used to depict the form and structure of naturalistic subjects, including the human figure. Gesture, sighting & measuring, contour drawing, and value. Metaphorical and narrative use of life forms and the human figure in art. [3] (HCA)

ARTS1104 - Intro to Lens-Based ArtTraditional and non-traditional uses of lens-based processes in art and science. Photography, cinematography, macro-vision, micro-vision, visualizing dreams, underwater photography, mapping, and augmented reality.Exploration of photographic representation, time, memory, archives, agency of images. Political and historical contexts. [3] (HCA)

ARTS1105 - Drawing Out of BoundsComposition, connection, and experimentation outside the classroom. Best practices for creating mobile studios for observational examination. History of art-making in "plein air." Nontraditional strategies for exhibiting artwork. [3] (HCA)

ARTS1111 - First-Year Writing SeminarIndependent learning and inquiry in an environment in which students can express knowledge and defend opinions through intensive class discussion, oral presentations, and written expression. May be repeated for credit once if there is no duplication of topic, but students may earn only up to 3 credits in any 1111 course per semester of enrollment. [3; maximum of 6 credits total for all semesters of 1111] (AXLE credit category varies by section)

ARTS1200 - Photography I: The Analog MomentAesthetics and techniques of the black-and-white medium. Image taking, making, and production of meaning.Camera use, film exposure, image quality, and darkroom practices. Basic history of photography and grounding the ways of seeing. The eye as a viewfinder. [3] (HCA)

ARTS1201 - Elusive Image: Between Analog and Digital PhotographyHybrid analog to digital class. Essential photography skills from camera obscura, analog and digital SLR, to portable device. Basic darkroom and digital workflow printing skills. Photographic obsolescence in the digital era and archeology of media. Historical and contemporary photography practices which define the condition of the medium. [3] (HCA)

ARTS1202 - Photography in Digital CultureDigital photography in today's media landscape. Ubiquitous proliferation of images in public sphere. From image taking to active consuming of images. Digital software. Portfolio and photographic essay building. History of digital media, sequencing, editing, digital output, and social media platforms. [3] (HCA)

ARTS1300 - PaintingTechnical and conceptual aspects of painting. Individual instruction based on ability and experience.Prerequisite: 1101 or 1102. [3] (HCA)

ARTS1400 - CeramicsIntroduction to ceramic design and preparation of clay objects. Hand-building, wheel-throwing, ceramic sculpture, surface enrichment, glazing, and kiln-firing. [3] (HCA)

ARTS1401 - Sculptural CeramicsHand-building techniques in clay, such as pinch, coil, and slab. Abstract and figurative vessels and forms.Formal, conceptual, and aesthetic aspects of production. Creativity and problem-solving. Glazing and use of electric kilns. Offered on a graded basis only. [3] (HCA)

ARTS1500 - SculptureChanging concepts, materials, and processes in sculpture. Individual instruction based on ability and experience. [3] (HCA)

ARTS1501 - AssemblageAdditive processes in sculpture. Problems involving found objects, kinetic/time-based ideas, and site-specific installations. [3] (HCA)

ARTS1502 - Installation ArtHistorical survey from 1900 to present; studio practice; formal and conceptual issues. [3] (HCA)

ARTS1503 - Text and ImageIntersection of art and writing. History, theory, and practice. Zines, posters, photography, new media, and artists' books. [3] (HCA)

ARTS1504 - Artists' BooksSeminar with studio. History of the artist's book in 20th century artistic movements. The book as an artifact of material culture. Production of experimental book forms including sculptural and time-based. Current uses of the book form as metaphor in contemporary art: Anselm Kiefer, Ann Hamilton, Kiki Smith, William Kentridge, Sophe Calle, Dieter Rot. [3] (HCA)

ARTS1505 - Graphic DesignIntroductory project-based course applying design principles, and visual translation: [3] (HCA)

ARTS1600 - Printmaking:Etching and ReliefIntroduction to printmaking. Focus on relief printing and etching on copper. Traditional and experimental approaches. [3] (HCA)

ARTS1601 - Printmaking: Screen and LithographyIntroduction to printmaking media, focus on screen printing and lithography. Traditional and experimental approaches. [3] (HCA)

ARTS1700 - Video ArtVideo as an art form. Group and individual productions. Viewing and discussion. Project analysis and critique.Relationship to such traditional media as photography and film. [3] (HCA)

ARTS1701 - Performance ArtHistory, theory, and practice of performance. Vocal studies and conceptual music, personal narrative, performance as a response to the cult-of-celebrity, body art, and performance with new technologies.Collaborative and solo performance projects. [3] (HCA)

ARTS1702 - Portable Media ICreative potential of inexpensive, portable digital media devices. Establishment of a rapid rhythm of practice and experimentation to build an inventory of ideas, methods, and techniques. Historic and contemporary developments in narrative and non-narrative digital video production. [3] (HCA)

ARTS1704 - Digital Animation IAnimation with computers. Traditional and experimental animations; interactive web-based projects. [3] (HCA) ARTS1800 - Sources of Contemporary Art

Animation with computers. Traditional and experimental animations; interactive web-based projects. [3] (HCA) ARTS1800 - Sources of Contemporary ArtContemporary studio art practice, issues, and theories. Visual and conceptual influences on living artists; idea formation. Students must participate in artist-in-residence projects. [4] (HCA)

ARTS1900 - Social Collective Art PracticeHistory and practice of making art within the social collective experience. Small group projects based on everyday living in The Commons. Not open to students who have earned credit for ARTS 1111-01. Total credit for this course and ARTS 1111-01 will not exceed 3 hours. Credit hours reduced from second course taken (or test or transfer credit) as appropriate. [3] (HCA)

ARTS2100 - Drawing and Composition IIPrerequisite: 1102. [3] (HCA)

ARTS2101 - Life Drawing IMethods used to depict form and structures of the human figure. Gesture, sighting and measuring, contour drawing, and value. Planar and anatomical analysis. Metaphorical and narrative use of the human figure in art.Prerequisite: 1102. [3] (HCA)

ARTS2102 - Drawing: Color Media IDrawing on paper with wet and dry color media. Traditional and experimental approaches. Prerequisite: 1102.[3] (HCA)

ARTS2103 - Experimental DrawingNon-traditional approaches to drawing materials and methods. Drawings as installations, animations, and murals. Prerequisite: 1102. [3] (HCA)

ARTS2104 - Drawing from Life IIMethods used to depict form and structure of naturalistic subjects, including the human figure. Gesture, sighting and measuring, contour drawing, and value. Metaphorical and narrative use of life forms and the human figure in art. Prerequisite: 1103. [3] (HCA)

ARTS2200 - Photography Workshop: Research and FormInterdisciplinary photography research. Development of image context and research methods. Community engagement. Collaborative project development and presentation. Lighting and tableaux photography. Activist, performative, and sculptural form of photography. Medium and large format. Photographic book. Special emphasis on diversity, inclusivity and perspectives. Prerequisite: 1200, 1201,1202, or 1101. [3] (HCA) ARTS2201 - Photography III: Image and Memory in Archive and Context

Interdisciplinary photography research. Development of image context and research methods. Community engagement. Collaborative project development and presentation. Lighting and tableaux photography. Activist, performative, and sculptural form of photography. Medium and large format. Photographic book. Special emphasis on diversity, inclusivity and perspectives. Prerequisite: 1200, 1201,1202, or 1101. [3] (HCA) ARTS2201 - Photography III: Image and Memory in Archive and ContextPublic and personal photographic and cinematic archives. Translation of archival objects and their material properties into exhibition objects through class discussions and site explorations. Creative writing and community engagement component. Prerequisite: 1200, 1201,1202, or 1101. [3] (HCA)

ARTS2202 - Lives of Images: Narratives and RepresentationExpanded photographic field. Image in its multiple forms and across platforms, from everyday life and personal to public. Analog to digital translation. New documentary and fictional narratives. Ways of seeing through the lens of gender, race, and class. Creative writing component. Image tableaux and lighting workshops.Prerequisite: 1101, 1200, 1201, or 1202. [3] (HCA)

ARTS2300 - Painting IIPrerequisite: 1300. [3] (HCA)

ARTS2400 - Ceramics IIDevelopment of ceramic design, both traditional and contemporary, functional and sculptural. Projects develop technical and aesthetic goals. Instruction includes demonstrations, slide presentations, field trips, guest artists, reports. Demonstrations include advanced throwing, complex constructions, glaze development withapplications, and kiln-firing. Prerequisite: 1400. [3] (HCA)

ARTS2401 - Concept and Clay: Composite FormsTechnical ability in handling clay and conceptual and interpretive elements in functional and/or sculptural forms.Individual solutions in form and surface. Prerequisite: 1400 or 1401. [3] (HCA)

ARTS2500 - Sculpture IIPrerequisite: 1500, 1501, or 1502. [3] (HCA)

ARTS2502 - Advanced Installation ArtTechniques, processes, and placement. Conceptual and historical practices. Prerequisite: 1502. [3] (HCA) ARTS2505 - Graphic Design II

Techniques, processes, and placement. Conceptual and historical practices. Prerequisite: 1502. [3] (HCA) ARTS2505 - Graphic Design IIIntermediate information design principles and visual translation. Hierarchy, typographic formalism, and narrative design. Project-based. Prerequisite: 1505. [3] (HCA)

ARTS2600 - Printmaking IIAdvanced study in traditional and experimental printmaking processes. Prerequisite: 1600 or 1601. [3] (HCA) ARTS2700 - Video Art II

Advanced study in traditional and experimental printmaking processes. Prerequisite: 1600 or 1601. [3] (HCA) ARTS2700 - Video Art IIViewing, discussion, analysis and critiques. Relationship to photography, film, and performance. Group and individual productions. Prerequisite: 1700. [3] (HCA)

ARTS2701 - Performance Art IIHistory, theory, and practice. Vocal studies, conceptual music, personal narrative, performance as a response to the cult-of-celebrity, body art and performance with new technologies. Collaborative and individual performance projects. Prerequisite: 1701. [3] (HCA)

ARTS2702 - Portable Media IIAdvanced exploration in use of portable digital media devices. Variety of methods for conceptualizing and making projects; enhanced art making skills. Prerequisite: 1700, 1701, or 1702. [3] (HCA)

ARTS3100 - Drawing and Composition IIIPrerequisite: 1102 and 2100. [3] (HCA)

ARTS3101 - Life Drawing IIPrerequisite: 2101. [3] (HCA)

ARTS3102 - Drawing: Color Media IIPrerequisite: 2102. [3] (HCA)

ARTS3300 - Painting IIIPrerequisite: 2300. [3] (HCA)

ARTS3333 - Engine for Art, Democracy, and JusticeVisual representation and multiple arts forms as focus for developing new knowledge and new practices in a forum for diverse approaches and inclusive discussion of experiments in cultural interconnections, historical entanglements, and the consequences of geographies, histories, and politics. Historical legacies and progress toward more just and democratic futures. Critical analysis and experiential projects. Expansion of the so-called South, its relations and interdependence with other geographies. Models of innovative Art practices. [3] (HCA) ARTS3600 - Printmaking III

Visual representation and multiple arts forms as focus for developing new knowledge and new practices in a forum for diverse approaches and inclusive discussion of experiments in cultural interconnections, historical entanglements, and the consequences of geographies, histories, and politics. Historical legacies and progress toward more just and democratic futures. Critical analysis and experiential projects. Expansion of the so-called South, its relations and interdependence with other geographies. Models of innovative Art practices. [3] (HCA) ARTS3600 - Printmaking IIIAdvanced study in traditional and experimental printmaking processes. Prerequisite: 2600. [3] (HCA)

ARTS3851 - Independent ResearchSupervised work beyond regular offerings in the curriculum. Students may only register with consent of instructor involved and with written approval of the director of undergraduate studies. May be repeated for a total of 6 credits if there is no duplication in topic, but students may earn only up to 3 credits per semester of enrollment. [1-3; maximum of 6 credits total for all semesters of ARTS 3851] (No AXLE credit)

ARTS3891 - Selected TopicsMay be repeated for a total of 9 credits if there is no duplication in topic. Students may enroll in more than one section of this course per semester. [3; maximum of 9 credits total for all semesters of ARTS 3891] (HCA) ARTS3970 - Directed Study: Senior Show and Contemporary Practices

May be repeated for a total of 9 credits if there is no duplication in topic. Students may enroll in more than one section of this course per semester. [3; maximum of 9 credits total for all semesters of ARTS 3891] (HCA) ARTS3970 - Directed Study: Senior Show and Contemporary PracticesTheoretical and practical concerns including professional practices for artists. Students visit exhibitions and discuss contemporary art with directed readings and lectures, participate in critiques, and exhibit their work.Seniors with a concentration in art only. [3] (HCA)

ARTS3971 - Independent Research: Senior ShowResearch conducted under faculty supervision specifically in preparation for the Senior Show. Open only to senior majors in their final term. [3] (No AXLE credit)

ARTS4998 - Senior Honors ResearchResearch conducted in consultation with a faculty member in Art. Offered on a graded basis only. Open only to honors majors. [3] (No AXLE credit)

ARTS4999 - Senior Honors ThesisResearch conducted in consultation with a faculty member in Art. Offered on a graded basis only. Open only to senior honors majors. [3] (No AXLE credit)

ASIA1001 - Commons iSeminarTopics vary. General Elective credit only. [1] (No AXLE credit)

ASIA1111 - First-Year Writing SeminarIndependent learning and inquiry in an environment in which students can express knowledge and defend opinions through intensive class discussion, oral presentations, and written expression. May be repeated for credit once if there is no duplication of topic, but students may earn only up to 3 credits in any 1111 course per semester of enrollment. [3; maximum of 6 credits total for all semesters of 1111] (AXLE credit category varies by section)

ASIA1201 - Writing Southeast AsiaLiterary representations, including novels and personal memoirs, of the history of Southeast Asia. Colonial and postcolonial periods. Representations of pluralistic cultures, diverse languages, religions, and indigenous and national identities. Indonesia, Myanmar, Philippines, Thailand, and Vietnam. All texts in English translation. [3]

ASIA1480 - Discover KoreaASIA1680 - Inside ChinaCourse DescriptionFirst-hand experience of China's dynamic society and expanding economy. Guided exploration of famous historical sites and contemporary institutions such as hospitals, businesses, factories, and art galleries in Beijing and Shanghai. Interviews with individuals from many different walks of life, including physicians, entrepreneurs, migrant workers, and college students. No knowledge of Chinese is required. Offered on a graded basis only. [3]

ASIA1680 - Inside ChinaFirst-hand experience of China's dynamic society and expanding economy. Guided exploration of famous historical sites and contemporary institutions such as hospitals, businesses, factories, and art galleries in Beijing and Shanghai. Interviews with individuals from many different walks of life, including physicians, entrepreneurs, migrant workers, and college students. No knowledge of Chinese is required. Offered on a graded basis only. [3]

ASIA1682 - Chinese Culture through Tai Chi & Qi GongChinese culture through physical and spiritual practice of Tai Chi (Yang Style short form) and (Ba Duan Jin) Qi Gong. Concepts of traditional Chinese culture, such as the "unity of man and nature," and the complementary forces of yin and yang. [1] (No AXLE credit)

ASIA1780 - Health and Well-Being at the Margins of Indian SocietyMaymester in India. Holistic medicine. Marginalized communities. Treatments and social services. NGO work. [3]

ASIA1781 - Sacred Space in IndiaObservation of sacred landscapes and architecture in India; examination of religious diversity, communal harmonies and tensions, expressed through the syncretic structures and the demarcation of territory. [3] (INT) ASIA1881W - The Body in Modern Japanese Culture

Observation of sacred landscapes and architecture in India; examination of religious diversity, communal harmonies and tensions, expressed through the syncretic structures and the demarcation of territory. [3] (INT) ASIA1881W - The Body in Modern Japanese Culture1890s to present. Cultural and social meanings of the body in Japanese history. Fiction and film. Gender, sexuality, illness, the senses, war, and violence. [3] (INT)

ASIA2100W - Fashioning the Self: Coming of Age and Asian ModernitiesThe coming-of-age novel (Bildungsroman) as a literary form in twentieth-century Asia. Travails of modernity and colonialism; the effects of crossing national, racial, and cultural boundaries; the experiences of traveling to urban centers, foreign countries, and ancestral lands. Texts from China, Indonesia, Japan, Philippines, and Vietnam. Taught in English. [3] (INT)

ASIA2210W - Hollywood HanoiCultural narratives of the Vietnam War, including novels and films. War and representation. International, minority, and antiwar perspectives on the violence and aftermath. Muhammad Ali, Werner Herzog, Jean Genet, Graham Greene, and Dinh Linh. All texts in English translation. Not open to students who have earned credit for ASIA 1111 Section 04 without permission. Total credit for this course and ASIA 1111 Section 04 will not exceed 3credit hours. Credit hours reduced from second course taken (or from test or transfer credit) as appropriate. [3]

ASIA2220 - Violence and Media in Southeast AsiaCold War era to contemporary. State dictatorships and police repression. The Cambodian Genocide; Indonesian mass killings; the aerial blitzkriegs of Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia; state and authoritarian violence in Thailand, Malaysia, and the Philippines. Representations of violence in the media. [3] (INT)

ASIA2230 - Sound, Performance, and the Asian CityListening for the sonic landscape of Asian cities from the early 20th century to the present. Urbanization, translocal popular musics, noise, music as protest, sound technologies, tourism. Historical and ethnographic perspectives on music, place, and identity. Offered on a graded basis only. [3] (INT)

ASIA2301 - Science and Society in South AsiaHistory of science in South Asia from the premodern through the postcolonial. Classical Sanskrit, Arabic and Persian scholarly traditions. Science in a global context. Early modern scientific connections. The place of science in empire and the new roles of science in the postcolonial nation state. [3] (INT)

ASIA2302 - Popular Culture of South AsiaFilm, sport, music, clothing, and other contemporary popular culture artifacts. [3] (INT)

ASIA2303 - Classical South Asia in the Modern WorldTransmission, reception, and interpretation of classical South Asian cultural artifacts, such as yoga, meditation, kama sutra, ayurveda, and religious stories. Critical reflections on authenticity, adaptation, medium, and audience. [3] (HCA)

ASIA2304 - The Bhagavad GitaClassical Sanskrit text (in translation), historical and literary context, reception and translation. Critical concepts in South Asian religious history and methods in approaching complex primary sources. [3] (HCA).

ASIA2306 - Environment and Development in South AsiaInterdisciplinary view of environmental and social movements in local South Asian and global contexts. Impacts of colonial legacies, social inequalities, and spirituality on environmental and development outcomes. [3] (INT) ASIA2307 - Transnational South Asia

Interdisciplinary view of environmental and social movements in local South Asian and global contexts. Impacts of colonial legacies, social inequalities, and spirituality on environmental and development outcomes. [3] (INT) ASIA2307 - Transnational South AsiaTransnational processes in contemporary South Asian identity. Anti-caste and Indigenous/Tribal social movements in India; Indian Ocean histories; South Asian diasporic practices in the US; comparative histories of race and caste; contemporary nationalism and religious identity. [3] (INT)

ASIA2308 - Narratives of Disaster and ApocalypseDisaster and apocalyptic scenarios in popular culture as revelations of political and cultural anxieties. Role of humanity in producing ecological crisis in the Anthropocene. Not open to students who completed 3333-01offered spring 2021. [3] (HCA)

ASIA2309W - Mountains to the Sea: Perspectives on Society, Politics, and the EnvironmentHow physical environments shape politics, religion, economy, cultural practices and infrastructure. Climate, soils, natural hazards, transportation, water, food, and mineral resources. Contestation over climate change and pollution. [3] (INT)

ASIA2411 - Cultural History of KoreaKorean culture from antiquity to the present through diverse media. Origins of Korean traditions, popular beliefs, and systems of thought. Korea's transformation through encounters with the West, struggle under Japanese colonial rule, and the Korean War. Contemporary economic development, democracy movement, relations with North Korea and the United States, and sociocultural diversification in the age of globalization. [3] (INT) ASIA2412 - Global Korean Cinema

Korean culture from antiquity to the present through diverse media. Origins of Korean traditions, popular beliefs, and systems of thought. Korea's transformation through encounters with the West, struggle under Japanese colonial rule, and the Korean War. Contemporary economic development, democracy movement, relations with North Korea and the United States, and sociocultural diversification in the age of globalization. [3] (INT) ASIA2412 - Global Korean CinemaFrom the colonial period to the Korean Wave in the new millennium. Film criticism, transnational and national contexts of film production, aesthetics of auteurs and genres, and local and global receptions of Korean cinema.[3] (INT)

ASIA2413 - History of Modern KoreaEarly twentieth century to present. Critical approaches and debates. Colonial experience and national building.Wars and migration; crisis and everyday life on the Korean Peninsula. Neoliberal globalization and its critiques, and efforts for reconciliation and peace in the Asia-Pacific region. [3] (INT)

ASIA2414 - Food and Family in Korean Pop CultureFood as embodiment of individual, family, and collective identities in Korea and the Korean diaspora. Class, gender, ethnicity, and body politics through literature, film, TV dramas, webtoons, and pop music. Repeat credit for students who have earned credit for ASIA 3892-01 in Fall 2018. Not open to students who have earned credit for ASIA 3892-01 in Fall 2018 without permission. [3] (INT)

ASIA2415W - Blood, Sweat, and Tears in Korean LiteratureCritical overview of Korean literature through thematic lenses. Culturally informed readings of old love songs, medieval hero fantasies, modern poems, subversive novels, contemporary K-pop, and webtoons. Violence, modernity, affect, language, genres, media, diaspora, translation, and globalization. Taught in English. [3] (INT) ASIA2416 - The Korean War through Film and Fiction

Critical overview of Korean literature through thematic lenses. Culturally informed readings of old love songs, medieval hero fantasies, modern poems, subversive novels, contemporary K-pop, and webtoons. Violence, modernity, affect, language, genres, media, diaspora, translation, and globalization. Taught in English. [3] (INT) ASIA2416 - The Korean War through Film and FictionAmerica's "forgotten war" in Korea through diverse media: films made in the US, North Korea, and South Korea; novels and comics produced by war survivors and their descendants around the globe. [3] (INT)

ASIA2511 - Popular Culture in Modern JapanPopular culture in Japan from 1900 to the present. The rise of mass culture and media, song, sports, food, fashion, and popular film genres. [3] (INT)

ASIA2512 - Explorations of Japanese AnimationHistorical contexts, production techniques, visual style, narrative forms, and interpretive analyses of feature-length Japanese animated films by auteur directors from the 1980s to the present, featuring Hayao Miyazaki and three others on a rotating basis from among Satoshi Kon, Mamoru Oshii, Mamoru Hosoda, Makoto Shinkai, Hideaki Anno, and Isao Takahata. [3] (INT)

ASIA2513W - Media Monsters in Contemporary JapanThe supernatural and the monstrous as represented in the context of mass media and consumerism incontemporary Japan. Live-action J-horror films, popular fiction, Manga, animated films, and television series. [3]

ASIA2514W - Contemporary Japan through Film and FictionJapanese social and cultural issues in literature and film since the 1980s: impact of post-bubble economy on family life; socio-economic marginality; gender inequality; generational conflict; aging; natural and human-made disasters. [3] (HCA)

ASIA2560 - Current Japan-U.S. RelationsSimilarities and differences in theory and practice in the United States and Japan on public policy issues such as trade, defense, environment, education, medical care, and racial prejudice. [3] (INT)

ASIA2605 - Romancing the Nation in Modern Chinese LiteratureFrom the fourteenth century to the present. Fiction, drama, and poetry. Family relations and nation-state in romantic writings. Knowledge of Chinese is not required. [3] (HCA)

ASIA2606 - Martial Tradition in Chinese LiteratureFrom eleventh century BCE to modern period. War, banditry, revenge, cannibalism, female knight-errant. All genres of literature, supplemented by visual material, theater, and film. Knowledge of Chinese is not required.[3] (HCA)

ASIA2607 - Self and Society in Pre-modern Chinese LiteratureFrom the seventeenth-century BCE to the seventeenth-century CE. Poetry, prose, fiction, and drama. Self, society, religion, gender, and print culture. Offered on a graded basis only. Serves as repeat credit for ASIA 3891section 01 in Fall 2015. Knowledge of Chinese is not required. [3] (HCA)

ASIA2608 - Chinese Drama: 13th to 20th CenturiesTraditional and modern Chinese drama. Text, image, and performance. Gender, religious thinking, commerce, and censorship. Offered on a graded basis only. Knowledge of Chinese not required. [3] (HCA)

ASIA2609W - Writing and Gender in Traditional ChinaPre-modern China: 1st century CE to 20th century CE. Women writers, women in family and society, gender relations, cross-dressing, and foot-binding. Poetry, prose, drama, fiction, and visual materials. Offered on a graded basis only. [3] (HCA)

ASIA2610 - Overseas Encounters: Reading the World through Students AbroadHistory of studying overseas and international students with focus on US and Asia. Literary materials from Asian and other traditions. Difficulties encountered in global context. National identities, religions, languages, home, loneliness, romantic relations. Studying and living in a foreign country. Identifying struggles and coping strategies. Serves as repeat credit for ASIA 3333, section 02 in Spring 2021. [3] (INT)

ASIA2620 - Chinese Culture Through CalligraphyTechniques of writing Chinese scripts using brush pen; aesthetic principles of appreciation; history and development of Chinese characters; master calligraphers and their masterpieces; relation between calligraphy and other art forms of China. [3] (HCA)

ASIA2630 - Traditional Chinese Medicine: Theories and PracticesHistorical encounters and divergences between medicine in China and in the West. Chinese medical classics, including the Inner Canon of the Yellow Emperor and early herbal manuals. The creation of Traditional Chinese Medicine in the People's Republic of China and the emergence of Chinese medicine as alternative medicine in the U.S. [3] (P)

ASIA2640 - Understanding Chinese: A Linguistic IntroductionBasic concepts of linguistics, analyses of Chinese at different linguistic levels, sound system, word formation, sentence structures, uses in contexts. Taught in English. Knowledge of Chinese is preferred, but not required.[3] (HCA)

ASIA2650 - Translating Sunzi (Sun Tzu) The Art of WarCommentaries on Sunzi and related Chinese military texts from Classical and Literary Chinese into English.Advanced study of Classical and Literary Chinese. Advanced study of military thought. Prerequisite: CHIN 4405.[3] (INT)

ASIA3151 - The Third World and LiteratureThe history of cultural and political concepts of the Third World from 1955 to the present. Contemporary literary and cultural debates regarding models of transnationalism and processes of globalization. National literatures and cultures foundational to the Third World model. The relationship between the genre of the novel and the formation of national communities. [3] (INT)

ASIA3155 - Blackness and the Asian CenturyThe solidarity movement between Africa and Asia from the turn of twentieth century into the current "Asian Century." Ongoing relevance of the color-line concept; racialized logics, processes of globalization, and the international division of labor. [3] (INT)

ASIA3333 - Special OfferingsTopics vary. [3]

ASIA3363 - Field InvestigationsSite specific practicum in Asian Studies. Content varies according to location and disciplinary focus. May be repeated for credit more than once if there is no duplication in topic. Course requires travel to investigation site.[3] (INT)

ASIA3630 - Traditional Chinese Medicine: Encounters with ScienceCompetition and dialogue between Chinese and Western medicine. Historical debates about anatomy and the reality of the body. Efforts to "scientize" Chinese medicine. Current integration of Chinese and biomedical practice in the US, use of biomedical standards to evaluate Chinese medicine's efficacy, critical evaluation of current scientific literature. Prerequisite: 2630. [3] (P)

ASIA3633 - Self-Cultivation in Ancient China300 BCE to 500 CE. Methods, goals, and contexts of self-cultivation in antiquity. Breathing exercises, meditation, visualization, sexual arts, sacrifice, alchemy, and other practices in their religious, cultural, and social contexts. [3] (INT)

ASIA3851 - Independent StudyDesigned primarily for majors who want to study Asian topics not regularly offered in the curriculum. Must have consent of instructor. May be repeated for credit more than once, but students may earn only up to 3 credits per semester of enrollment. [1-3] (No AXLE credit)

ASIA3852 - Independent StudyDesigned primarily for majors who want to study Asian topics not regularly offered in the curriculum. Must have consent of instructor. May be repeated for credit more than once, but students may earn only up to 3 credits per semester of enrollment. [1-3] (No AXLE credit)

ASIA3880 - Internship TrainingUnder faculty supervision, students from any discipline can gain experience in a broad range of public and private agencies, institutions, and programs in projects related to Asian Studies. Must be taken on a pass/fail basis and in conjunction with 3883, Internship Research. Corequisite: 3883. [1-6] (No AXLE credit)

ASIA3883 - Internship ResearchUnder faculty supervision, students gain experience in any of a variety of settings, such as community, municipal, or government agencies. Must be taken on a graded basis and concurrently with 3880. Corequisite: 3880. [1-6] (No AXLE credit)

ASIA3891 - Special TopicsTopics vary. May be repeated for credit more than once if there is no duplication in topic. Students may enroll in more than one section of this course each semester. [1-3] (No AXLE credit)

ASIA3892 - Special TopicsTopics vary. May be repeated for credit more than once if there is no duplication in topic. Students may enroll in more than one section of this course each semester. [1-3] (No AXLE credit)

ASIA3980 - Junior Honors ReadingsMay be repeated for credit more than once. Students may enroll in more than one section of this course each semester. [3] (No AXLE credit)

ASIA4998 - Honors ResearchResearch conducted in consultation with a member of the faculty or affiliated faculty of the program. Open only to senior honors majors. [1-3] (No AXLE credit)

ASIA4999 - Honors ResearchResearch conducted in consultation with a member of the faculty or affiliated faculty of the program. Open only to senior honors majors. Prerequisite: 4998. [1-3] (No AXLE credit)

ASAM2101 - Asian American History until 1924The Manila Galleon Trade until the Johnson-Reed Act of 1924. Labor, race, and gender at the root of Asian American history. Settler colonialism, labor migration, and Asian exclusion. Offered on a graded basis only. [3]

ASAM2102 - Asian American History: From 1924 to the PresentThe Johnson-Reed Act of 1924 until the present day. Labor, empire, and migration in Asian America. Japanese incarceration, social movements in the 1960s, the model minority myth, and Asian Americans in popular culture today. Offered on a graded basis only. [3] (US)

ASAM2106 - Sociology of Asian AmericaSociological and interdisciplinary study of Asian Americans and social, cultural, and political meanings of "Asian America." Emphasis on race, ethnicity, gender, and class. Serves as repeat credit for ASIA 3891, section 03 and SOC 4961, section 01 in Fall 2021. [3] (HCA)

ASAM2107 - Social Movements in Asia and Asian AmericaAsian and Asian American social movements in transnational, comparative-historical, and intersectional contexts. [3] (HCA)

ASAM3101 - Southeast Asian AmericansSoutheast Asians in the United States, ranging from pensionados in the early 20th century to refugees after U.S.wars in Southeast Asia. U.S. empire in Southeast Asia, the complexities of historical memory, and Southeast Asian American cultural production. Offered on a graded basis only. [3] (US)

ASAM3102 - Cold War Asian AmericaHow the Cold War (1945-1989) helped shape Asian America. Transnational approach to the history of U.S.intervention in Asia in conjunction with Asian American experiences and popular culture of the period. Offered on a graded basis only. [3] (US)

ASAM3106 - Race and the Environment in Asian America and the PacificInterdisciplinary study of environmental inequality with focus on Asian Americans, Native Hawaiians, and Pacific Islanders. Transnational, comparative-historical, and intersectional contexts. [3] (HCA)

ASAM3107 - Science, Technology, and the Body in Global AsiaSocial, cultural, and political dimensions of science, technology, and the body. [3] (HCA)

ASTR1001 - Commons iSeminarTopics vary. General Elective credit only. [1] (No AXLE credit)

ASTR1010 - Introductory Astronomy: Stars and GalaxiesObserved and physical properties of stars. Supernovae, neutron stars, and black holes. Our Milky Way galaxy and other galaxies. Cosmology, dark matter, dark energy, and the Big Bang. Not open to students who have earned credit for ASTR 1210 without permission. Total credit for this course and ASTR 1210 will not exceed 4credit hours. Credit reduced from second course taken (or test or transfer credit) as appropriate. [3] (MNS) ASTR1010L - Introductory Nighttime Astronomy Laboratory

credit hours. Credit reduced from second course taken (or test or transfer credit) as appropriate. [3] (MNS) ASTR1010L - Introductory Nighttime Astronomy LaboratoryMotion of the celestial sphere and apparent and real motions of celestial bodies as viewed from inside the Milky Way. Observations of meteor showers, comets, and artificial satellites. Telescopic observations of astronomical objects. Stellar spectra. Laboratory ordinarily accompanied by 1010 or 3000. Satisfies the AXLE lab course requirement when completed with 1010 or 3000. Serves as repeat credit for ASTR 1020L. Not open to students who have earned credit for ASTR 1210 without permission. Total credit for this course and ASTR 1210 will not exceed 4 credit hours. Credit reduced from second course taken (or test or transfer credit) as appropriate. [1]

ASTR1020L - Introductory Daytime Astronomy LaboratoryPhases of the Moon, colors of stars, shapes and motions of galaxies, properties of exoplanets, and ages of star clusters. Telescopic observations of the Sun. Laboratory ordinarily accompanied by 1010 or 3000. Satisfies the AXLE lab course requirement when completed with 1010 or 3000. Serves as repeat credit for ASTR 1010L. Not open to students who have earned credit for ASTR 1210 without permission. Total credit for this course and ASTR 1210 will not exceed 4 credit hours. Credit reduced from second course taken (or test or transfer credit) as appropriate. [1] (No AXLE credit)

ASTR1111 - First-Year Writing SeminarIndependent learning and inquiry in an environment in which students can express knowledge and defend opinions through intensive class discussion, oral presentations, and written expression. May be repeated for credit once if there is no duplication of topic, but students may earn only up to 3 credits in any 1111 course per semester of enrollment. [3; maximum of 6 credits total for all semesters of 1111] (AXLE credit category varies by section)]

ASTR1210 - Introduction to Observational AstronomyTelescopic and naked eye observations. Light, optics, telescopes, and CCD cameras. Motions of the sky. Kepler's laws. Phases and topography of the Moon. Distances, temperatures, and brightnesses of stars. Star clusters.Dark matter. Taught entirely at Dyer Observatory using 24-inch telescope. Satisfies the AXLE lab course requirement. Not open to students who have earned credit for ASTR 1010, 1010L, or 1020L, without permission.Total credit for this course and ASTR 1010, 1010L, or 1020L, will not exceed 4 hours. Credit reduced from second course taken (or test or transfer credit) as appropriate. [4] (MNS)

ASTR2110 - The Solar SystemThe sky, orbits, and gravity. Ancient astronomy. Seasons, the calendar, phases and motions of the moon, tides, and eclipses. Terrestrial planets, giant planets and their moons and rings, asteroids, comets, meteorites, and the sun. Habitable zones for planets and moons, extremophiles, and the possibility of life on other worlds. [3]

ASTR2130 - The Trial of Galileo and its BackgroundThe interdependence of cosmological theories and religious teachings from the eighth century BCE to the end of the seventeenth century. Examines scientific works and religious texts, including those of Aristotle, Thomas Aquinas, Copernicus, Luther, Galileo, and Newton. [3] (P)

ASTR2150 - Celestial Navigation and Celestial DynamicsSources of motion of Earth, including orbital motion, rotation, precession, and nutation. Planetary transits and eclipses. Apparent and real motions of stars. Celestial coordinate systems. Sextant observations and celestial navigation. Serves as repeat credit for ASTR 3890 in Summer 2017. [3] (MNS)

ASTR3000 - Principles of AstrophysicsTools and methods of astrophysics, including light and telescopes. Cosmology, the Big Bang, and the origin and evolution of matter. Galaxies, star formation, and the physics of stars, including nucleosynthesis and stellar death. Techniques for discovering and measuring properties of exoplanets. Prerequisite: either PHYS 1501, 1601, or 1911: and either MATH 1100, 1200, or 1300. [3] (MNS)

ASTR3600 - Stellar AstrophysicsPhysics of stellar structure and evolution, including nuclear energy generation, equations of state, and heat transfer by radiation and convection. Numerical stellar models. Observational aspects of stellar astrophysics.Prerequisite: either MATH 2400, 2420, or 2610; either PHYS 2255 or 3651; 3200; and either CS 1101, 1103, or 1104. [3] (MNS)

ASTR3700 - Galactic AstrophysicsInterstellar matter and gaseous nebulae, the structure and evolution of normal galaxies, active galactic nuclei and quasars, and observational cosmology. No credit for students who have earned credit for 8040. Prerequisite: MATH 2400, 2420, or 2610; and either PHYS 2255 or 3651. Corequisite: CS 1101, 1103, or 1104. [3] (MNS) ASTR3800 - Structure Formation in the Universe

Interstellar matter and gaseous nebulae, the structure and evolution of normal galaxies, active galactic nuclei and quasars, and observational cosmology. No credit for students who have earned credit for 8040. Prerequisite: MATH 2400, 2420, or 2610; and either PHYS 2255 or 3651. Corequisite: CS 1101, 1103, or 1104. [3] (MNS) ASTR3800 - Structure Formation in the UniverseObservational and theoretical aspects of extragalactic astronomy. Measurements of galaxies and of the large-scale structure of the universe from galaxy surveys. Expansion history of universe; roles of dark matter and energy. Growth of density fluctuations in universe due to gravity. Cosmological N-body simulations and formation of dark matter halos. Physics of galaxy formation. Experimental probes of dark matter and energy.Prerequisite: One of PHYS 1501, 1601, or 1911; and one of PHYS 1502, 1602, or 1902; and one of MATH 2400, 2420, or 2610; and one of CS 1101, 1103, or 1104. [3] (MNS)

ASTR3850 - Undergraduate ResearchResearch and scholarly investigation or directed readings in astronomy under close supervision of sponsoring faculty member. Enrollment by arrangement with sponsoring faculty member and approval of director of undergraduate studies. May be repeated for credit, for a total of no more than 10 total credit hours and for no more than 5 credit hours per semester. [1-5] (No AXLE credit)

ASTR3890 - Selected Topics[1-3] (No AXLE Credit)

ASTR3900 - Gravitational Astrophysics: General Relativity and CosmologyIntroduction to Einstein's theory describing gravity as curvature of four-dimensional spacetime. Special relativity, differential geometry, tensor analysis, spacetime curvature, the Einstein Field Equations, the Schwarzschild Metric for stars and black holes, production and detection of Gravitational Waves, and the Friedmann-Robertson-Walker metric for cosmology. Prerequisite: PHYS 2275 and 2290. [3] (MNS)

ASTR4998 - Honors Research and Senior ThesisIndependent experimental or theoretical investigations of basic problems in astronomy and astrophysics under faculty supervision, culminating in a written thesis submitted to and an oral defense presented to a departmental faculty examination committee. Required for departmental honors in Astronomy. Enrollment by arrangement with sponsoring faculty member and approval of director of undergraduate studies. May be repeated for a total of 10 credits, but students may earn only up to 6 credits per semester of enrollment.Prerequisite: major in Physics, junior or senior standing. [1-6] (No AXLE credit)

BRQ1100 - Baroque StringsIndividual practice focused on the art and practice of Baroque violin, viola, cello, or bass, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. [1-2]

BCB2101 - Chemical Biology FocusRoles of proteins, lipids, nucleic acids, and carbohydrates in human disease. Experimental techniques.Prerequisite: CHEM 2221 and BSCI 1510. [1] (No AXLE credit)

BCB3101 - Special Topics in Chemical BiologyMay be repeated for credit more than once if there is no duplication in topic. Prerequisite: CHEM 3710. [3] (MNS) BCB3201 - Independent Laboratory Research

May be repeated for credit more than once if there is no duplication in topic. Prerequisite: CHEM 3710. [3] (MNS) BCB3201 - Independent Laboratory ResearchStudent research under the supervision of faculty associated with the Biochemistry and Chemical Biology major.Enrollment through course coordinator (after arrangement with faculty) before the end of the previous semester.Prerequisite: BSCI 1510 and CHEM 1602, consent of Biochemistry and Chemical Biology Director ofUndergraduate Studies, 3.0 cumulative grade point average. May be repeated for credit more than once, but students may earn only up to 6 credits per semester of enrollment. [2-6] (No AXLE credit)

BCB3880 - Internship TrainingUnder faculty supervision, students from any discipline can gain scientific research experience in a broad range of public or private institutions or government laboratories. Credit hours are based upon actual work performed at the internship site. A minimum of 1 credit hour in background readings and research must be completed in BCB 3881 concurrently with, and regardless of, the number of hours earned in BCB 3880. A substantial research paper must be submitted at the end of the semester during which the internship is completed. These credit hours may NOT count toward the minimum credit hours required for the biochemistry & chemical biology major.Normally a 3.0 grade point average, 6 hours of prior coursework in BCB major, and prior approval of a specific plan of work by the director of undergraduate studies in Biochemistry & Chemical Biology are required. Offered on a Pass/ Fail basis only and must be taken concurrently with 3881. Corequisite: 3881. Variable credit. [1-9] (No AXLE credit)

BCB3881 - Internship Readings and ResearchUnder faculty supervision, students from any discipline can gain scientific research experience in a broad range of public or private institutions or government laboratories. Credit hours are based upon readings or research supervised by BCB faculty to lend some intellectual foundation to the internship experience. A minimum of 1credit hour in background readings and research must be completed in BCB 3881 concurrently with, and regardless of, the number of credit hours earned in BCB 3880. A substantial research paper must be submitted at the end of the semester during which the internship is completed. These credit hours may not count toward the minimum credit hours required for the Biochemistry & Chemical Biology major. Normally a 3.0 grade point average, 6 hours of prior coursework in BCB, and prior approval of a specific plan of work by the director of undergraduate studies in Biochemistry & Chemical Biology are required. Offered on a graded basis only and must be taken concurrently with 3880. Corequisite: 3880. Variable credit. [1-6] (No AXLE credit)

BCB4320 - Advanced Chemical Biology(Also listed as CPBP 8320 Foundations in Chemical Biology) Overviews and in-depth case studies on the breadth of chemical biology. Importance of chemical biology in advancing biological sciences. Offered on a graded basis only. Prerequisite: CHEM 3710 [3] (MNS)

BCB4965 - Advanced Integrated LaboratoryChemical and biomolecular analysis, separation, and spectroscopy. Chemical synthesis. Experimental design, computational methods. Offered on a graded basis only. Limited to BCB senior majors. Prerequisite or Corequisite: BSCI 2520 and CHEM 3710. [3] (MNS)

BCB4966 - Advanced Integrated LaboratoryContinuation of 4965. Directed research. Offered on a graded basis only. Limited to senior BCB majors.Prerequisite: 4965. [3] (MNS)

BCB4999 - Honors ResearchOriginal supervised research. Consent of DUS required. Only open to BCB majors. May be repeated for credit.Prerequisite: 3201. [3-6] (No AXLE credit)

BSCI1001 - Commons iSeminarTopics vary. General Elective credit only. [1] (No AXLE credit)

BSCI1100 - Biology TodayBroad coverage of the biological sciences presenting evolution as the unifying concept. Particular emphasis on basic biological processes in cells and the relationships/interactions between organisms and their environment.Topics include cell structure and function, genetics and inheritance, evolution and diversity, populations, communities and ecosystems, and topics related to biology and society. Not open to students who have earned credit for BSCI 1510 or 1511 without permission. Total credit for this course and BSCI 1510 or 1511 will not exceed 3 hours. Credit hours reduced from second course taken (or from test or transfer credit) as appropriate.[3] (MNS)

BSCI1100L - Biology Today LaboratoryLaboratory investigations of the genetics, physiology, and ecology of plants and animals. One three-hour laboratory per week to accompany 1100. Not open to students who have earned credit for BSCI 1510L, 1511L, or 1512L without permission. Total credit for this course and BSCI 1510L or 1511L will not exceed 1 credit hours; total credit for this course and BSCI 1512L will not exceed 2 credit hours. Credit hours reduced from second course taken (or from test or transfer credit) as appropriate. Satisfies the AXLE lab course requirement when completed with 1100. Co- or pre-requisite: 1100. [1] (No AXLE credit)

BSCI1103 - Green Earth: The Biodiversity and Evolution of PlantsEvolution of biodiversity from the Cambrian period through today. Theories and challenges of its conservation.Case studies drawn from Hawaii, Madagascar and Australia. Not intended for students planning to major in biological sciences. Not open to students who have earned credit for 1510 or 1511 without permission. Total credit for this course and 1510 or 1511 will not exceed 3 credit hours. Credit hours reduced from second course taken (or from test or transfer credit) as appropriate. [3] (MNS)

BSCI1103L - Green Earth Laboratory: The Biodiversity and Evolution of Land PlantsNot open to students who have earned credit for 1510L, 1511L, or 1512L without permission. Total credit for this course and 1510L or 1511L will not exceed 1 credit hour; total credit for this course and 1512L will not exceed 2 credit hours. Credit hours reduced from second course taken (or from test or transfer credit) as appropriate. Corequisite: 1103. Satisfies the AXLE lab course requirement when completed with 1103. [1]

BSCI1105 - Human BiologyBSCI1105L - Human Biology LaboratoryCourse DescriptionSatisfies the AXLE lab requirement when completed with 1105. Not intended for students majoring in Biological Sciences. Not open to students who have earned credit for BSCI 1510, 1510L, 1511, 1511L, or 1512L without permission. Total credit for BSCI 1105/1105L and BSCI 1510, 1510L, 1511, or 1511L will not exceed 4 credit hours; total credit for this course and BSCI 1512L will not exceed 5 credit hours. Credit hours reduced from second course taken (or from test or transfer credit) as appropriate. Co-requisite: BSCI 1105. [1] (No AXLE

BSCI1105L - Human Biology LaboratorySatisfies the AXLE lab requirement when completed with 1105. Not intended for students majoring in Biological Sciences. Not open to students who have earned credit for BSCI 1510, 1510L, 1511, 1511L, or 1512L without permission. Total credit for BSCI 1105/1105L and BSCI 1510, 1510L, 1511, or 1511L will not exceed 4 credit hours; total credit for this course and BSCI 1512L will not exceed 5 credit hours. Credit hours reduced from second course taken (or from test or transfer credit) as appropriate. Co-requisite: BSCI 1105. [1] (No AXLE

BSCI1110 - Introduction to MicrobiologyStructure, metabolism, genetics, and ecology of microorganisms. Emphasis will be on the impactsmicroorganisms have on human health and society. Not intended for students majoring in Biological Sciences.Not open to students who have earned credit for BSCI 2150. [3] (MNS)

BSCI1111 - First-Year Writing SeminarIndependent learning and inquiry in an environment in which students can express knowledge and defend opinions through intensive class discussion, oral presentations, and written expression. May be repeated for credit once if there is no duplication of topic, but students may earn only up to 3 credits in any 1111 course per semester of enrollment. [3; maximum of 6 credits total for all semesters of 1111] (AXLE credit category varies by section)

BSCI1400 - Science Education Pedagogy SeminarThis pedagogy seminar accompanies a core course in the College of Arts & Sciences and examines the process of teaching and learning of that course content. Students enrolled in the core course lecture may elect to participate in this accompanying pedagogy seminar. This optional seminar will be team-taught by the core course instructor and an education faculty member. [2]

BSCI1510 - Introduction to Biological SciencesAn integrative approach to the science of life for science and engineering students. Macromolecular structure and function. Cell structure, reproduction, metabolism, and energy production. Genomes, replication, gene structure, RNA, and protein synthesis. Not open to students who have earned credit for BSCI 1100, 1103, or 1105 without permission. Total credit for this course and BSCI 1100 or 1103 will not exceed 3 credit hours; total credit for this course and BSCI 1105 will not exceed 4 credit hours. Credit hours reduced from second course taken (or from test or transfer credit) as appropriate. Prerequisite or corequisite: CHEM 1601. [3] (MNS) BSCI1510L - Biological Sciences Laboratory

An integrative approach to the science of life for science and engineering students. Macromolecular structure and function. Cell structure, reproduction, metabolism, and energy production. Genomes, replication, gene structure, RNA, and protein synthesis. Not open to students who have earned credit for BSCI 1100, 1103, or 1105 without permission. Total credit for this course and BSCI 1100 or 1103 will not exceed 3 credit hours; total credit for this course and BSCI 1105 will not exceed 4 credit hours. Credit hours reduced from second course taken (or from test or transfer credit) as appropriate. Prerequisite or corequisite: CHEM 1601. [3] (MNS) BSCI1510L - Biological Sciences LaboratoryLaboratory to accompany 1510. One three-hour laboratory per week. Satisfies the AXLE lab course requirement when completed with 1510. Not open to students who have earned credit for BSCI 1100L, 1103L, or 1105BSCI1511 - Introduction to Biological SciencesCourse DescriptionContinuation of 1510. Cell communication. Physiology, organ function and development. Mendelian andpopulation genetics. Evolution, ecology, and speciation. Populations, ecosystems, and conservation biology. Not open to students who have earned credit for BSCI 1100, 1103, or 1105 without permission. Total credit for this course and BSCI 1100 or 1103 will not exceed 3 credit hours; total credit for this course and BSCI 1105 will not exceed 4 credit hours. Credit hours reduced from second course taken (or from test or transfer credit) as appropriate. Prerequisite: 1510. [3] (MNS)

BSCI1511 - Introduction to Biological SciencesContinuation of 1510. Cell communication. Physiology, organ function and development. Mendelian andpopulation genetics. Evolution, ecology, and speciation. Populations, ecosystems, and conservation biology. Not open to students who have earned credit for BSCI 1100, 1103, or 1105 without permission. Total credit for this course and BSCI 1100 or 1103 will not exceed 3 credit hours; total credit for this course and BSCI 1105 will not exceed 4 credit hours. Credit hours reduced from second course taken (or from test or transfer credit) as appropriate. Prerequisite: 1510. [3] (MNS)

BSCI1511L - Biological Sciences LaboratoryLaboratory to accompany 1511. One three-hour laboratory per week. Satisfies the AXLE lab course requirement when completed with 1511. Not open to students who have earned credit for BSCI 1100L, 1103L, 1105, or 1512L without permission. Total credit for this course and BSCI 1100L or 1103L will not exceed 1 hour; total credit for this course and BSCI 1105 will not exceed 4 hours; total credit for this course and BSCI 1512L will not exceed 2 hours. Credit hours reduced from second course taken (or from test or transfer credit) as appropriate.Prerequisite or corequisite: 1511. [1] (No AXLE credit)

BSCI1512L - Biological Sciences LaboratoryAlternative to 1511L. Directed research projects with emphasis on experimental design and analysis. Satisfies the AXLE lab course requirement when completed with 1511. Offered on a graded basis only. Not open to students who have earned credit for BSCI 1100L, 1105, or 1511L without permission. Total credit for this course and BSCI 1100L or 1511L will not exceed 2 hours; total credit for this course and BSCI 1105 will not exceed 5hours. Credit hours reduced from second course taken (or from test or transfer credit) as appropriate.Prerequisite or corequisite: 1511. Prerequisite: 1510L. [2] (No AXLE credit)

BSCI2101 - Human Anatomy and Physiology I(Previously listed as MHS 3101, NURS 3101) Structure and function of the human organism. Integration of the gross anatomical structures and organ systems with microscopic structure, physiological function, and homeostatic mechanisms. Clinical relevance of selected topics. Not open to students who have completed NURS3101 or MHS 3101. Prerequisite: 1510; Prerequisite or corequisite: 1511. [4] (MNS)

BSCI2150 - General MicrobiologyGenetics, cell biology, physiology, and diversity of microorganisms; their role in research and impact on human health and the environment. Prerequisite: 1511. No credit for students who have earned credit for BSCI 3234.[3] (MNS)

BSCI2150L - General Microbiology LabLaboratory to accompany Introduction to Microbiology (1110) or General Microbiology (2150). Two laboratory sessions per week. Satisfies the AXLE lab course requirement when completed with 1110 or 2150. Prerequisite or corequisite: 1110 or 2150 or 3234. [1]

BSCI2201 - Introduction to Cell BiologyStructure and function of cells, subcellular organelles, and macromolecules. Fundamentals of organelle function, membrane transport, energy production and utilization, cell motility, cell division, intracellular transport and mechanisms of signal transduction. Prerequisite: 1510. [3] (MNS)

BSCI2201L - Cell Biology LaboratoryOne three-hour laboratory and discussion period per week. Satisfies the AXLE lab course requirement when completed with 2201. Prerequisite or corequisite: 2201. [1] (No AXLE credit)

BSCI2205 - EvolutionEvolutionary theory, with emphasis on evolutionary mechanisms. Microevolutionary processes of adaptation and speciation and macro-evolutionary patterns. Evidence from genetics, ecology, molecular biology, andpaleontology in the historical context of the neo-Darwinian synthesis. No credit for graduate students in Biological Sciences. Prerequisite: 1511. [3] (MNS)

BSCI2210 - Principles of GeneticsBasic principles and mechanisms of inheritance discussed and related to other biological phenomena and problems. Prerequisite: 1511. [3] (MNS)

BSCI2210L - Genetics LaboratoryOne three-hour laboratory and discussion period per week. Satisfies the AXLE lab course requirement when completed with 2210. Prerequisite or corequisite: 2210. [1] (No AXLE credit)

BSCI2218 - Introduction to Plant BiologyDiversity of plants within the framework of their evolution and environmental adaptations. Biomes from the tropical rain forest to the Vanderbilt arboretum. Three lectures and one laboratory per week. Prerequisite: 1511.[3] (MNS)

BSCI2218L - Plant Biology LabLaboratory to accompany 2218. One three-hour laboratory per week. Pre- or co-requisite: BSCI 2218. [1]

BSCI2219 - Introduction to ZoologyA structural and functional study of the major animal groups. The problems presented to animals by their environments, and the anatomical and physiological mechanisms by which they adapt. Three lectures and one laboratory period per week. Prerequisite: 1511. [4] (MNS)

BSCI2238 - EcologyPopulation biology, evolutionary ecology, community structure, with emphasis on species interactions, including competition, predation, and symbiosis. Prerequisite: 1511. [3] (MNS)

BSCI2238L - Ecology LabOne three-hour laboratory and discussion period or field trip per week. Satisfies the AXLE lab course requirement when completed with 2238. Prerequisite or corequisite: 2238. [1] (No AXLE credit)

BSCI2520 - BiochemistryStructures and mechanisms of action of biological molecules, proteins, nucleic acids, lipids, and polysaccharides.Enzymology. Carbohydrate metabolism. Prerequisite: Either 1510 or CHBE 2150; and either CHEM 2211 or 2221.[3] (MNS)

BSCI3101 - Human Anatomy and Physiology II(Previously listed as MHS 3102, NURS 3102) Continuation of 2101. Structure and function of the human organism. Integration of the gross anatomical structures and organ systems with microscopic structure, physiological function, and homeostatic mechanisms. Clinical relevance of selected topics. Not open to students who have completed NURS 3102 or MHS 3102. Prerequisite: 2101. [4] (MNS)

BSCI3226 - ImmunologyThe molecular and cellular basis of immunity. Emphasis on molecular structure, the genetic origin of diversity in B-cell and T-cell receptors, antigen presentation, and the cellular interactions leading to the immune response.Tolerance, tumor and transplantation immunity, autoimmune and immunodeficiency diseases, and allergy.Prerequisite: 2201 or 2210. [3] (MNS)

BSCI3228 - Biodiversity: Great Barrier Reef and Rainforests of AustraliaMay session; two weeks on campus followed by two weeks in Australia. Origins. Threats to, and conservation of, populations and species. Serves as repeat credit for BSCI 3890 Section 01 Summer 2016. [3] (MNS)

BSCI3229 - Instruction in Scientific Rigor and ReproducibilityFundamentals of proficient research: methodical experimental design, analytical assessment of literature, proper interpretation of data, model development, use of 'MATLAB' for analysis. Covers implicit bias, scientific transparency, data and material sharing, sample blinding, randomization, criteria for sample exclusion, plagiarism, conflicts of interest, and statistical methods. Prerequisite: 1511. [3] (MNS)

BSCI3230 - Biological ClocksStudy of innate mechanisms for measurement of time in living organisms. Emphasis on the functionalsignificance and physiological basis of biological clocks in animals and humans. Topics include circadian rhythms, time-compensated celestial navigation, photoperiodism, and the role of biological clocks in human behavior. Prerequisite: 1511. [3] (MNS)

BSCI3231 - PaleobiologyMacroevolutionary processes as observed through the fossil record. Inference of evolutionary relationships, physiology, reproduction, behavior, and ecology. Fundamentals of paleobiology, paleoecology, paleoclimates, macroecology, biogeography, geology, geochemistry, anthropology, and conservation paleobiology. Effects of climate change and human impacts, in deep-time. Prerequisite: 1511. [3] (MNS)

BSCI3232 - Biodiversity, Climate Change and Our HealthImpacts of climate change on biological and ecological systems from the Paleozoic era to today. Inter-play of earth's systems, climate, and biological innovations. Effects on our natural resources, and consequences for our health. Prerequisite: 1511. [3] (MNS)

BSCI3233 - Conservation BiologyEcological, evolutionary, social, and economic aspects of biodiversity loss and ecosystem disruption due to human activities. Climate change, habitat fragmentation, species overexploitation, and invasive species.Sustainable development, habitat restoration, and species reintroduction. Prerequisite: 1511. [3] (MNS) BSCI3234 - Microbial Ecology and Evolution

Sustainable development, habitat restoration, and species reintroduction. Prerequisite: 1511. [3] (MNS) BSCI3234 - Microbial Ecology and EvolutionMicroorganisms, including bacteria, archaea, eukaryotes, viruses, and their mobile genetic elements. Origins, universality, and diversity of microbial life. Modes of genome evolution, symbioses between microbes and hosts, biotechnology, applications, and human microbiome. Prerequisite: 2150. [3] (MNS)

BSCI3236 - ParasitologyBiology and epidemiology of eukaryotic parasites of medical and veterinary significance. Diagnosis, treatment, and control of parasitic protists, platyhelminthes, nematodes, and arthropods. Impact on global health.Prerequisite: 1511. [3] (MNS)

BSCI3239 - Evolution of BehaviorTheoretical and empirical research on the evolution of behavior. Evolutionary approaches to the study of animal behavior, including the role of behavior in foraging, competition, predator-prey interactions, and sociality.Behavioral adaptations and their roles in sexual selection, mating systems, and animal communication.Prerequisite: 1511 and 2205. [3] (MNS)

BSCI3245 - Biology of CancerApplication of cell biology, molecular biology, and genetics to the study of cancer. Tumorigenesis; cellular oncogenes; growth factor signaling; tumor suppressor genes; apoptosis; metastasis and invasion. Prerequisite: 1511. [3] (MNS)

BSCI3247 - Molecular EvolutionThe theory of evolution at the molecular level. The evolution of DNA and RNA sequences, proteins, and genome structures will be studied using models from population genetics and comparative approaches. Molecular clocks, the evolution of gene regulation and globin genes, molecular phylogeny, and human evolution.Prerequisite: 2210 and 2205. [3] (MNS)

BSCI3252 - Cellular NeurobiologyStructure and function of nerve cells. Emphasis on electrical excitability, synaptic transmission, and sensory transduction. Cellular mechanisms underlying simple behaviors, sensory information processing, and learning and memory. Prerequisite: 1511. [3] (MNS)

BSCI3254 - Neurobiology of BehaviorNerve cell interactions in neuronal networks of the central nervous system of animals and their impact for regulating behavior. Sensory systems, sensory-motor integration, central processing of information, neuronal-hormonal interactions; and brain anatomy and organization in invertebrates and vertebrates. Prerequisite: BSCI 1511 or NSC 2201. [3] (MNS)

BSCI3256 - Molecules of the BrainMolecules of neural wiring, involving cell identity, pathfinding, synaptogenesis. Molecules of nerve cell communication, with relationship to drugs of addiction and abuse. Molecules of nervous system plasticity, and the mechanistic bases of learning and memory. Relation of these mechanisms to causes of human neurological diseases. Prerequisite: 1511. [3] (MNS)

BSCI3258 - Vertebrate PhysiologyFundamental mechanisms of the major vertebrate physiological systems with an emphasis on humans. Special physiological adaptations of vertebrates to their environment (respiration of aquatic animals, birds, and deep diving mammals; salt balance in fresh and saltwater environments; altitude adaptation). Prerequisite: 2201 or 2520. [3] (MNS)

BSCI3260 - Vertebrate BiologyComprehensive overview of the vertebrates. Morphology, physiology and behaviors; adaptations to specific environments, and the ecology, distribution and conservation of select groups. Key transformations leading to vertebrate diversity. Evolutionary history and relationships. No credit for students who earned credit for BSCI 3890 section 1 offered spring 2016 or spring 2017. Prerequisite: BSCI 1511. [3] (MNS)

BSCI3270 - Statistical Methods in BiologyAn introduction to statistical methods used in the analysis of biological experiments, including the application of computer software packages. Emphasis on testing of hypotheses and experimental design. Topics include descriptive statistics, analysis of variance, regression, correlation, contingency analysis, and the testing of methods for sampling natural populations. Prerequisite: 1511. [3] (MNS)

BSCI3272 - Genome ScienceAims and importance of the science. Retrieval of genome data from public databases; experimental and computational methods used in analysis of genome data and their annotation. Functional aspects of genomics, transcriptomics, and proteomics; use of phylogenetics and population genomics to infer evolutionaryrelationships and mechanisms of genome evolution. Prerequisites: 1511. [3] (MNS)

BSCI3333 - Special OfferingTopics vary by section and instructor. May be repeated for credit; students may register for more than one section of this course in the same semester. Not eligible toward the major or minor. [3] (MNS)

BSCI3850 - Independent ReadingReading and discussion of research papers with a member of the faculty. Prerequisite: consent of Biological Sciences 3850 coordinator before the end of the previous semester. May be repeated for credit once if there is no duplication in topic. Students may enroll in more than one section of this course each semester. [1; maximum of 2 credits total for all semesters of BSCI 3850] (No AXLE credit)

BSCI3860 - Introduction to ResearchWork in the laboratory of a member of the Biological Sciences faculty. Term paper required. Consent of course coordinator and enrollment by arrangement before the end of the previous semester is required. Prerequisite: 1510. Prerequisite or corequisite: 1511. [1] (No AXLE credit)

BSCI3861 - Directed Laboratory ResearchDirected student research on a project conceived by a member of the Biological Sciences faculty. Enrollment by arrangement before the end of the previous semester. May be taken only once, and participants ordinarily expected to have overall grade point average of B or better. Offered on a graded basis only. Prerequisite: 1511, one intermediate BSCI course appropriate to the major or 3860, and consent of Biological Sciences 3861coordinator. [2-4] (No AXLE credit)

BSCI3865 - Field InvestigationsContent varies according to location and disciplinary focus. May be repeated for credit more than once if there is no duplication in topic. Students may enroll in more than one section of this course each semester. [1-3] (MNS) BSCI3890 - Special Topics in Biological Sciences

Content varies according to location and disciplinary focus. May be repeated for credit more than once if there is no duplication in topic. Students may enroll in more than one section of this course each semester. [1-3] (MNS) BSCI3890 - Special Topics in Biological SciencesTopics vary. May be repeated for credit more than once by permission of the director of undergraduate studies.BSCI3961 - Independent Laboratory ResearchCourse DescriptionOriginal student research on a defined problem in Biological Sciences and under the supervision of Biological Sciences faculty. Some independence in the design and execution of the problem. Enrollment by arrangement before the end of the previous semester. Prerequisite: 3861, consent of Biological Sciences 3961 coordinator, cumulative grade point average of B. May be repeated for credit more than once, but students may earn only up to 6 credits per semester of enrollment. [2-6] (No AXLE credit)

BSCI3961 - Independent Laboratory ResearchOriginal student research on a defined problem in Biological Sciences and under the supervision of Biological Sciences faculty. Some independence in the design and execution of the problem. Enrollment by arrangement before the end of the previous semester. Prerequisite: 3861, consent of Biological Sciences 3961 coordinator, cumulative grade point average of B. May be repeated for credit more than once, but students may earn only up to 6 credits per semester of enrollment. [2-6] (No AXLE credit)

BSCI3965 - Undergraduate SeminarDiscussions and papers based on readings in research journals. Topics vary. Prerequisite: fulfillment of the intermediate course requirements for the major. May be repeated for credit more than once if there is no duplication in topic, but only two hours may count toward the major. Students may enroll in more than one section of this course each semester. [2] (No AXLE credit)

BSCI4243 - Principles of Human DiseaseCurrent understanding of diseases. Genetic, molecular, and cellular biological basis of disease. Connection between basic sciences and disease insights. Focus on obesity, aging, cancer, neurodegeneration, infections, and biomedical technology. Prerequisite: 2201 or 2210 or 2520. [3] (MNS)

BSCI4265 - Biochemistry IIMechanisms and interactions of biological molecules involved in maintenance of genetic information and cellular homeostasis. Prerequisite: 2520. [3] (MNS)

BSCI4266 - Advanced Molecular GeneticsPrinciples of classical and molecular genetic analysis: mutation and recombination, mapping, and the application of genetic methodology to the study of complex systems. Special emphasis on modern genomic approaches.Prerequisite: 2210. [3] (MNS)

BSCI4274 - ProteinsMolecular structures and biological functions of proteins. Underlying chemical and physical properties. Structural motifs and topology; folding and dynamics; enzyme catalysis; protein-DNA interactions. Structure-based drug design; protein symmetry; supramolecular protein machines. Chemical and spectroscopic methods to probe protein structure and behavior in solution. Prerequisite: 2520. [3] (MNS)

BSCI4275 - Molecular BiologyMechanisms underlying the maintenance and expression of our genomes. DNA replication, DNA repair,transcription, and RNA metabolism. Students who have completed 4265 require instructor approval to register.Prerequisite: 2520. [3] (MNS)

BSCI4285 - Membrane BiochemistryMolecular mechanisms and interactions of biological molecules in membrane biochemistry and maintenance of cellular homeostasis. Membrane transport and trafficking; lipids; signaling; protein translocation and quality control. Students who have completed 4265 require instructor approval to register. Prerequisite: 2520. [3]

BSCI4999 - Honors ResearchOpen only to majors in the Honors Program. May be repeated for credit more than once, but students may earn only up to 6 credits per semester of enrollment. [4-6] (No AXLE credit)

BME1015 - Innovations in Biomedical EngineeringReview of areas within the field of BME. Topics include current research and industry trends in imaging, regenerative medicine, biophotonics, medical devices, technology and entrepreneurship, and low resource engineering. Open only to first-year and transfer students. Students in the School of Engineering receive open elective credit for BME 1015. SPRING. [1]

BME2100 - BiomechanicsStructure and mechanics of the musculoskeletal system and the properties and strength of biological materials.Application of Newtonian mechanics, statics, and strength of materials to bone, muscle, tendon, other biological material, and medical devices. Credit offered for only one of BME 2100 or CE 2200. Prerequisite: PHYS 1601, MATH 1301, CS 1101 or 1103 or 1104. [3]

BME2210 - Biomaterial ManipulationDesign and characterization of biomaterials. Assessment of tissue engineering scaffolds and nanoparticles.Manipulation of cell growth and expression. Application of mechanics and materials principles to medical and consumer products. Laboratory exercises in tissue culture, microscopy, mechanical testing, biochemical assays, and computer modeling. Prerequisite: BME 2100, BSCI 1510/1510L. Corequisite: BME 2200. SPRING. [3]

BME2301 - Systems Physiology I(Previously BME 2001) Quantitative physiology from the engineering point of view. Descriptive physiology of several organ systems (nervous, musculoskeletal, cardiovascular, blood). Mathematical modeling and computer simulation of organ systems and physiologic control mechanisms. No credit for students who have earned credit for BME 3100. Prerequisite: CS 1101 or 1103 or 1104. Corequisite: BSCI 1510, PHYS 1602. [3]

BME2302 - Systems Physiology II(Previously BME 2002) Quantitative physiology from the engineering point of view. Descriptive physiology of several organ systems (immune, endocrine, respiratory, renal, gastrointestinal, reproductive). Mathematical modeling and computer simulation of organ systems and physiologic control mechanisms. No credit for students who have earned credit for BME 3101. Prerequisite: CS 1101 or 1103 or 1104; PHYS 1601. Corequisite: BSCI 1510, PHYS 1602. [3]

BME2400 - Quantitative Methods I: Statistical AnalysisApplication of modern computing methods to the parametric and nonparametric statistical analysis ofbiomedical data. Probability, sampling, estimation, analysis of variance, single and multivariable regression, and the principles of hypothesis testing, experimental design and clinical trials are emphasized. No credit for students who have earned credit for BME 3200. Prerequisite: MATH 2300. Corequisite: CS 1101 or 1103 or 1104.[3]

BME2860 - Introduction to Undergraduate ResearchIntroduction to Undergraduate Research. Introduction to research, either experimental or theoretical in nature or a combination of both, under the supervision of a biomedical engineering faculty member or another faculty member approved by the course director. Students in the School of Engineering may only receive open elective credit for BME 2860. Prerequisites: Consent of course director (see BME undergraduate website for registration details). FALL, SPRING. [1-3]

BME2900W - Biomedical Engineering Lab IIntroductory laboratory with guided reports. Experiment topics may cover systems physiology, biomechanics, and biomaterials. Emphasis on methods, instrumentation, and equipment used in biomedical engineering. One three-hour laboratory per week. No credit for students who have earned credit for BME 4900W. Prerequisite: CS1101 or 1103 or 1104. Corequisite: BME 2301. [1]

BME3000 - Physiological Transport PhenomenaMechanics of fluids, heat transfer, and mass transfer in living systems. Basic theories of transport phenomena, applications to mammalian and cellular physiology and the design of medical devices. Prerequisite: BME 2100; MATH 2400 or 2420. [3]

BME3301 - Biomedical Instrumentation IElectronic circuits for measuring and processing physiological signals, analog front-end design, analog-to-digital conversion and digital signal processing. Physics and applications of clinically relevant biosensors. Laboratory exercises focus on construction, verification, and validation of biomedical instruments. Three lectures and one three-hour laboratory. No credit for students who have earned credit for BME 3300. Prerequisite: EECE 2112.Corequisite: BME 3400. [4]

BME3302 - Biomedical Instrumentation IISystems-level approach to the design of devices that monitor clinically-relevant physiological functions and variables, driven by the needs of specific pathophysiological conditions. Laboratory exercises stress instrumentation design and integration of multiple modalities into an instrumentation platform. Three lectures and one three-hour laboratory. No credit for students who have earned credit for BME 3300. Prerequisite: BME3301 or both EECE 2213 and 2213L. [4]

BME3400 - Quantitative Methods II: Signals and Numerical AnalysisQuantitative analysis and computational methods for biomedical engineering applications. Signal and image processing, numerical analysis, and linear and nonlinear models. No credit for students who have earned credit for BME 3300. Prerequisite: CS 1101 or 1103 or 1104; MATH 2400. Corequisite: BME 2400. [3]

BME3500 - Biomedical Materials: Structure-Property Relationships and ApplicationsStructure-property relationships in both natural and synthetic, hard and soft materials. Bio-inspired materials design, the role of self-assembly in achieving highly ordered structures, material design and properties for emerging biomedical applications, factors influencing biocompatibility, performance of biomaterials in both soft and hard tissues, and biological response to implants. No credit for students who have earned credit for BME2200. Prerequisite: CHEM 1602, PHYS 1601. [3]

BME3700 - Bioengineering Failure - Mechanisms and RamificationsMechanisms of failure for drugs and devices analyzed through case studies. Bioengineering practice through the lens of FDA approval, ethics, and decision theory. Students will create a biotechnology case study for presentation to the class for assessment. Prerequisite: BME 2100, BME 3000. SPRING. [3].

BME3750 - Low Resource BioengineeringNeeds associated with low-resource settings, particularly regarding global health. Application of engineering skills to design solutions to meet current needs. Includes a SOLIDWORKS project. FALL. [3]

BME3800 - 3D Computer Drafting in BME DesignDevelopment of 3D visualization skills to transform ideas into parts, engineering drawings, and assemblies in SOLIDWORKS. Projects emphasize applications in biomedical engineering. Lectures include interactive in-class activities. [3]

BME3860 - Undergraduate ResearchIndependent research, either experimental or theoretical in nature or a combination of both, under the supervision of a biomedical engineering faculty member or another faculty member approved by the course director. The class meets one hour per week to discuss research design, responsible conduct of research, laboratory documentation, literature review, and scientific writing. Prerequisite: Junior standing, consent of course director (see BME undergraduate website for registration details). [2-3; maximum of 6 hours total for all semesters of BME 3860 and 3861]

BME3861 - Undergraduate ResearchA continuation of the research in 3860 or research in a different area of biomedical engineering. Prerequisite: Consent of course director. [1-3 each semester; maximum of 6 hours total for all semesters of BME 3860 and 3861.]

BME3890 - Special Topics[3]

BME3891 - Special Topics[3]

BME3892 - Special Topics[3]

BME3893 - Special Topics[3]

BME3900W - Biomedical Engineering Lab IIIntermediate laboratory with oral and written reports. Experiment topics may include thermodynamics, biological transport, signal analysis, biological control, and biological imaging. Emphasis on data analysis and communication. One three-hour laboratory per week. No credit for students who have earned credit for BME4900W. Prerequisite: BME 2900W. Corequisite: BME 2100, BME 2302. [1]

BME4030 - Cell Mechanics and MechanobiologyQuantitative understanding of the way cells detect, modify, and respond to physical aspects of the cell environment. Foundational principles of cell mechanics. State-of-the-art experimental practices of cell mechanics and mechanobiology. Prerequisite: BME 2100, BME 3000. SPRING. [3]

BME4100 - Lasers in Surgery and MedicineFundamentals of lasers, light-tissue interaction, problem-based design of optical instrumentation. Applications in laser surgery, disease detection, and surgical guidance. Includes hands-on experiences. Prerequisite: PHYS1602. FALL. [3]

BME4200 - Principles and Applications of BioMicroElectroMechanical Systems (BioMEMS)The principles, design, fabrication and application of micro- and nano-devices to instrument and control biological molecules, living cells, and small organisms, with a strong emphasis on development ofmicrofabricated systems and micro- and nano-biosensors. Students will lead discussions from the research literature. Graduate students will prepare a research proposal or fabricate a functioning BioMEMS device. FALL.[3]

BME4250 - Mobile Application Design for HealthcareDevelopment of mobile platform applications for healthcare. Motivation and role of telemedicine in US and global healthcare systems. Covers UX / UI design principles for mobile application development. Includes a team-based, structured project. Prerequisite: CS 1101, 1103, or 1104; junior standing. FALL of alternating years.[3]

BME4320 - Engineering Approaches to CancerBasic concepts of cancer including somatic evolution, models of tumorigenesis, growth dynamics, drug resistance, and evolutionary dynamics. Computational methods will be used to model and predict these behaviors, and classic and current scientific literature will be discussed, and used to help define group projects.Course project includes a mid-semester group presentation, progress reports, and a final report. Corequisite: BME 3000. FALL. [3]

BME4340 - Drug DeliveryAdvanced course on the design, synthesis, characterization, testing, and disease treatment application of drug delivery systems. Focus on synthetic biomaterials, especially polymeric materials. A final written project is required. Prerequisite: BME 3500. [3]

BME4400 - Foundations of Medical ImagingPhysics and engineering of image formation by different modalities used for medical applications. Concepts common to different imaging modalities and limits of physical phenomena. Mathematical concepts of image formation and analysis; techniques for recording images using X-rays (including CT), ultrasound, magnetic resonance, and radioisotopes (including SPECT and PET). Methods of evaluating image quality. Prerequisite: CS1100 or 1101 or 1103 or 1104; PHYS 1602; MATH 2400. SPRING. [3]

BME4420 - Quantitative and Functional ImagingQuantitative analysis of non-invasive imaging techniques to assess the structure and function of tissues in the body. Applications of computed tomography, positron emission tomography, ultrasound, and magneticresonance imaging to tissue characterization. Measurement of lesion volume, cardiac output, organ perfusion, brain function, and receptor density. Prerequisite: CS 1101 or 1103 or 1104; PHYS 1602; MATH 2400. FALL [3]

BME4430 - Medical Imaging InstrumentationLaboratory course on medical imaging transducers, electronics and systems design. Functioning tabletop optical computed tomography, ultrasound and magnetic resonance systems are built and characterized. Corequisite: BME 3302. SPRING. [3]

BME4460 - Ultrasound ImagingPhysics and engineering of ultrasonic imaging. Principles of bioacoustics and mechanical wave phenomena, ultrasonic image formation including both B-Mode and Doppler. Mathematical aspects of image formation and analysis including linear systems and Fourier analysis. Prerequisite: BME 2400 or 3400. FALL. [3].

BME4500 - NanobiotechnologySynthesis and characterization of nanostructured materials for use in living systems. Clinical applications of nanoscale biosensors. Methods for single molecule detection in biological specimens. Quantitativestructure/function assessment of nanostructures in living systems. Prerequisite: BSCI 1510; BME 3000 or CHBE3300 or ME 3224. SPRING. [3]

BME4530 - Synthetic Biology and Cell DesignPrinciples used to interrogate and encode cell behaviors. Exploration of modules from diverse domains of life that can be assembled for bioengineering applications, including adoptive cell therapy and regenerative medicine. Prerequisite: BSCI 1510 or ChBE 2150. SPRING. [3]

BME4550 - Drug Development & Biotechnology: Pharmaceutical EngineeringBiology and bioengineering as a basis for successfully launching new high-tech bioventures. Overview of biotechnology in modern drug discovery and development, with treatment of business aspects ofpharmaceutical innovation. Prerequisite: BME 2301, BME 2302, BME 2400. SPRING. [3].

BME4901W - Biomedical Engineering Lab IIIAdvanced laboratory with comprehensive written reports. Students design experiments building on laboratory exercises conducted in BME 2900W and 3900W. Emphasis on experimental design, use of controls, andinterpretation of data. One three-hour laboratory per week. No credit for students who have earned credit for BME 4900W. Prerequisite: BME 2400, 3900W. [1] (Not offered until 2021-2022.)

BME4950 - Design of Biomedical Engineering Devices and Systems IIntegration of the engineering and life science backgrounds of senior biomedical engineering students through the presentation of design principles for medical devices and systems. Design principles and case examples for biomedical electronics, mechanical, chemical, and computing systems are presented. A full-semester design project is required. Evaluation is conducted through periodic oral and written presentations, and through a final written and poster report. Corequisite: BME 3302. [2]

BME4951 - Design of Biomedical Engineering Devices and Systems IIIntegration of the engineering and life science backgrounds of senior biomedical engineering students through the presentation of design principles for medical devices and systems. Design principles and case examples for biomedical electronics, mechanical, chemical, and computing systems are presented. A full-semester design project is required. Evaluation is conducted through periodic oral and written presentations, and through a final written and poster report. Prerequisite: BME 4950. [3]

BME4959 - Senior Engineering Design SeminarElements of professional engineering practice. Professionalism, licensing, ethics and ethical issues, intellectual property, contracts, liability, risk, reliability and safety, interdisciplinary teams and team tools, codes, standards, professional organizations, careers, entrepreneurship, human factors, and industrial design. Prerequisite: senior standing. Corequisite: BME 4950. FALL. [1]

BUS1100 - Essentials of Financial Reporting(Previously BUS 2100) Emphasis on mandated corporate disclosure. Economic concepts that guide thedevelopment and use of accounting conventions as well as the institutional context that disciplines producers and users. Not open to students who have earned credit for FNEC 1600 without permission, as students will forfeit credit hours. Serves as repeat credit for FNEC 1600. Prerequisite: ECON 1020. [1.5]

BUS1300 - Principles of Finance(Previously BUS 2300) Emphasis on asset valuation. Stock and bond valuation, capital budgeting, cost of capital, market efficiency, and company valuation. Not open to students who have earned credit for FNEC 2700 without permission, as students will forfeit credit hours. Serves as repeat credit for FNEC 2700. Prerequisite: BUS 1100(Previously BUS 2100), ECON 1020, and one of BME 3200, ECON 1500, ECON 1510, MATH 1011, MATH 2810,MATH 2820, MATH 2821, PSY 2100, PSY-PC 2110, or SOC 2100. [1.5]

BUS1400 - Organizational Behavior(Previously BUS 2400) Accomplishing goals by effectively working for, with, and through others. The units of analysis explored are individuals, teams, and organizations. Not open to HOD or HOS majors, or to students who have earned credit for HOD 2100 without permission, as students will forfeit credit hours. Serves as repeat credit for HOD 2100. [1.5]

BUS1600 - Principles of Marketing(Previously BUS 2600) Success in business is driven by providing goods and services that consumers need and want. This course covers how to achieve such success through analyses of companies, customers, andcompetitors, and making the right decisions regarding what products to offer, and how to price, promote, and distribute them. Course content spans a wide variety of settings including consumer goods, hi-tech, and service firms, and puts a particular emphasis on digital marketing opportunities and the evolving role of social media.Not open to students who have earned credit for MGRL 1200 without permission, as students will forfeit credit hours. Serves as repeat credit for MGRL 1200. Prerequisite: one of BME 3200, ECON 1500, ECON 1510, MATH1011, MATH 2810, MATH 2820, MATH 2821, PSY 2100, PSY-PC 2110, or SOC 2100. [1.5]

BUS1700 - Managing Operations(Previously BUS 2700) Provides an overview of operations in both service and manufacturing organizations.Process analysis, queuing, inventory management, quality management, lean operations, and optimization.Prerequisite: ECON 1020 and one of BME 3200, ECON 1500, ECON 1510, MATH 1011, MATH 2810, MATH 2820,MATH 2821, PSY 2100, PSY-PC 2110, or SOC 2100. [1.5]

BUSA1001 - Commons iSeminar(Previously MGRL 1001) Topics vary. General Elective credit only. [1] (No AXLE credit)

BUSA1100W - Fundamentals of Management(Previously MGRL 1100W) Principles and practices of business in all areas of organization, finance, marketing, human resources, technology, and operations. Does not count as an elective in the undergraduate business minor. Serves as repeat credit for students who have earned credit for 1100. [3] (SBS)

BUSA2150 - Leading Business Through CrisisResponses of business leaders respond in times of crisis (e.g., climate change, global pandemic, product recall, etc.). Awareness, risk assessment, business continuity, adverse events, adaptation, reputation management, and resilience. How individual and organizational perspective, purpose, priorities, plans, and performance shape leadership choices and outcomes. Serves as repeat credit for MGRL 3333, section 01 Spring 2021. [3] (SBS) BUSA2160 - Corporate Social Responsibility

Responses of business leaders respond in times of crisis (e.g., climate change, global pandemic, product recall, etc.). Awareness, risk assessment, business continuity, adverse events, adaptation, reputation management, and resilience. How individual and organizational perspective, purpose, priorities, plans, and performance shape leadership choices and outcomes. Serves as repeat credit for MGRL 3333, section 01 Spring 2021. [3] (SBS) BUSA2160 - Corporate Social ResponsibilityRoles and responsibilities of business in society. Stakeholder theory, governance, intersection of strategy and operations, and "ESG" (environmental/ social governance) from company and investor perspectives globally.Focus on diversity/inclusion and climate change/sustainability. Serves as repeat credit for MGRL 3333, section 02 in Spring 2021. [3] (SBS)

BUSA2200 - Data Analysis and Presentation(Previously MGRL 2200) Collection, structure, and analysis of data. Quantitative problem solving using spreadsheets. Design strategy and principles for communication of results. Prerequisite: One of BME 3200, ECON 1500, ECON 1510, MATH 1011, MATH 2810, MATH 2820, MATH 2821, PSY 2100, PSY-PC 2110, or SOC2100. [3] (SBS)

BUSA2205 - Business DevelopmentCase studies of processes, techniques, and theories of business development, including sales methodologies, data and analytics, motivation and compensation, sales strategy, and sales execution. Serves as repeat credit for students who completed BUSA 3891 offered spring 2023. [3] (SBS)

BUSA2300 - Entrepreneurship: The Business Planning Process(Previously MGRL 2300) Lean methods for developing a new venture; processes of ideation and innovation; business model validation, fundamentals of new venture funding, and principles of small business operation. [3]

BUSA2600 - Managerial Accounting(Previously FNEC 2600) Selected topics in managerial accounting. Prerequisite: BUS 1100 (Previously BUS2100). [3] (SBS)

BUSA2700 - Consumer FinanceFinancial decision-making. Saving, borrowing, spending, and investing strategies given interest rates, inflation, transaction costs, management fees, and taxes. Financial institution assessment and pricing of risk given monetary and fiscal policies, credit scoring models, regulation, adverse selection, moral hazard, and actuarial tables. Emotional and behavioral biases in finance. No credit for students who completed FNEC 3333 or BUSA 3334. [3] (SBS)

BUSA2705 - Corporate Finance(Previously FNEC 2705) Strategic financial decisions. Corporate financial theory, cost of capital and capital budgeting, discounted cash flow valuation, and financial multiples. Payout policy, equity and debt financing, option pricing theory, and applications. Prerequisite: BUS 1300 (Previously BUS 2300). [3] (SBS)

BUSA3105 - Negotiation(Previously MGRL 3105) Contemporary challenges in leading change in organizations and building effective management teams. The context and dynamics of negotiation; components, structure, and management ofnegotiations; and varying requirements across the spectrum of negotiation types. [3] (SBS)

BUSA3110 - Business Management(Previously MGRL 3110) Seminar. Analysis of cases representing strategic decisions in operations, resource management, competitive balance, and product and service offerings. Prerequisite: BUS 1100 and BUS 1600(Previously BUS 2100 and BUS 2600), or BUSA 3255 (Previously MGRL 3255). [3] (SBS)

BUSA3200 - Advanced Marketing(Previously MGRL 3200) Case study of processes, techniques, and theories of marketing, including branding, advertising, interactive media, sales promotion, and marketing research. Offered on a graded basis only.Prerequisite: BUS 1600 (Previously BUS 2600). [3] (SBS)

BUSA3255 - Corporate Strategy(Previously MGRL 3255) Elective intended for business minor. Relationship between organizational structure and strategy. Decision structures to achieve performance objectives. Analysis of team, competitor, and market issues and dynamics. Prerequisite: BUS 1100 (Previously BUS 2100). [3] (SBS)

BUSA3300 - Entrepreneurial Challenge(Previously MGRL 3300) Simulation of the entrepreneurial experience from idea generation to funding.BUSA3333 - Leading Business In Times of CrisisCourse Description(Previously MGRL 3333) Events that threaten an organization's survival. How organizational purpose, effective communication, and solid planning and execution informs and improves a leader's response. C-level executives who have guided their organizations through major disruptions. Leadership skills to anticipate threats, to cope with adverse events, and to adapt to changing conditions. [3] (SBS)

BUSA3333 - Leading Business In Times of Crisis(Previously MGRL 3333) Events that threaten an organization's survival. How organizational purpose, effective communication, and solid planning and execution informs and improves a leader's response. C-level executives who have guided their organizations through major disruptions. Leadership skills to anticipate threats, to cope with adverse events, and to adapt to changing conditions. [3] (SBS)

BUSA3334 - Consumer Finance(Previously FNEC 3333) Money management. Earning, saving, investing, spending, and borrowing. Budgetary obligations and planning for retirement. Developments in consumer finance, pros and cons to the consumer.Institutions, payment mechanisms, asset classes, optimal asset allocation, and retirement objectives. [3] (SBS) BUSA3605 - Financial Reporting and Analysis

Institutions, payment mechanisms, asset classes, optimal asset allocation, and retirement objectives. [3] (SBS) BUSA3605 - Financial Reporting and Analysis(Previously FNEC 3605) Selected topics in accounting and financial reporting. Cash flow statements, income taxes, long-term debt, and leases. Investments, derivative securities, contingencies, stockholders' equity, and purchase accounting. Prerequisite: BUS 1100 (Previously BUS 2100). [3] (SBS)

BUSA3700 - Investment Analysis(Previously FNEC 3700) Investment principles and practices. Security analysis and valuation. Portfolio theory.Current issues in the financial sector. Stock market simulation. Prerequisite: BUS 1300 (Previously BUS 2300).[3] (SBS)

BUSA3705 - Financial Management(Previously FNEC 3705) Analysis of cases representing capital budgeting, forecasting cash flow, risk assessment, capital structure, and mergers and acquisitions. Seminar. Prerequisite: BUS 1300 (Previously BUS 2300). [3]

BUSA3710 - Corporate Valuation(Previously FNEC 3710) Intrinsic, relative, and contingent valuation methodologies. Theoretical and market basis for investment. Valuation project. Prerequisite: BUS 1300 (Previously BUS 2300). [3] (SBS)

BUSA3841 - Directed Study(Previously MGRL 3841) Directed readings and related field research toward a scholarly project conceived and executed under the supervision of a faculty member. Limited to juniors and seniors; may not be repeated. [3]

BUSA3851 - Independent Study in BusinessBUSA3891 - Special TopicsCourse DescriptionBusiness and management issues. May be repeated for credit if there is no duplication in topic. No more than three hours may be counted toward the BUS minor. [3] (No AXLE credit)

BUSA3891 - Special TopicsBusiness and management issues. May be repeated for credit if there is no duplication in topic. No more than three hours may be counted toward the BUS minor. [3] (No AXLE credit)

CAR2300 - Career Development: Life Beyond VUApplication of career theory, self-assessment, and practical exercises and experiences to enhance the career development of Arts & Science students. Focus on connecting majors with the world of work, exploring career options, and improving written and oral communications related to the workplace. Designed especially for sophomores and juniors. [1.5] (No AXLE credit)

CTLN1103 - Intensive Elementary CatalanRomance tongue of northeastern Spain, Andorra, and southwestern France. Emphasis on oral communication, grammar, reading, and culture. Prior study of another Romance language through the intermediate level is expected. No credit for students who have earned credit for a higher level Catalan language course. [3] (INT) Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering

CHBE2100 - Chemical Process PrinciplesA foundation for advanced work in chemical engineering. Process problems of a chemical and physico-chemical nature. Emphasis on stoichiometry, material balances, and energy balances required for design computation.Prerequisite: MATH 1301. Corequisite: CHEM 1602. FALL, SPRING. [3]

CHBE2150 - Molecular and Cell Biology for EngineersBasic molecular and cellular biology principles and concepts. Application of engineering principles to further the understanding of biological systems. Protein structure and function, transcription, translation, post-translational processing, cellular organization, molecular transport and trafficking, and cellular models. Not open to students who have earned credit for BSCI 1510 without permission. Total credit for this course and BSCI 1100 or BSCI 1510 will not exceed 3 credit hours. Credit reduced from second course taken (or from test or transfer credit as appropriate). Prerequisite: CHEM 1602. FALL. [3]

CHBE2200 - Chemical Engineering ThermodynamicsApplication of the laws of thermodynamics to chemical engineering systems. Entropy balances and analysis of thermodynamic cycles. Methods of estimating thermodynamic properties of pure fluids and mixtures, including equations of state, to provide background for chemical process design and simulation. Corequisite: MATH 2300.FALL, SPRING. [3]

CHBE2250 - Modeling and Simulation in Chemical EngineeringDevelopment of chemical engineering process models and their numerical solutions. The models include solution of linear and non-linear equations, eigenvalue problems, differentiation, and integration, ordinary differential equations, linear and nonlinear regression. Chemical process simulation using commercial simulators is introduced. Prerequisite: CHBE 2100. Corequisite: CHBE 2200; MATH 2420; CS 1100 or 1101 or 1103 or 1104.SPRING. [3]

CHBE2900W - Technical Communications for Chemical EngineersPreparation for academic and professional communication tasks. Principles of effective communication, information design, and audience awareness. Development of written reports, oral presentations, posters, visuals, emails, letters, and memos for communicating technical details. Corequisite: CHBE 2200. SPRING [1]

CHBE3200 - Phase Equilibria and Stage-Based SeparationsThermodynamic principles and calculations of mixture phase equilibrium. Development of correlations to design chemical separation processes. Applications to separation processes involving gases, liquids, and solids such as distillation, adsorption, and extraction. Simulation of separation processes. Prerequisite: CHBE 2100, CHBE2200, and either CHBE 2250 or BME 2301. FALL. [3]

CHBE3250 - Chemical Reaction EngineeringThermodynamic basis of chemical equilibrium. Analysis of chemical kinetic data and application to the design of chemical reactors. Batch, semibatch, and flow reactors are considered in both steady-state and transient operation. Brief treatments of catalysis and physical and chemical adsorption. Prerequisite: CHBE 2200. SPRING.[3]

CHBE3300 - Fluid Mechanics and Heat TransferPrinciples of momentum and energy transport and their application to the analysis and design of chemical and biological engineering systems. Prerequisite: PHYS 1601, MATH 2420. FALL. [3]

CHBE3350 - Mass Transfer and Rate-Based SeparationsPrinciples of mass transfer and their application to the analysis of chemical and biological engineering systems.Design of rate-based separation operations. Prerequisite: CHBE 3300. SPRING. [3]

CHBE3600 - Chemical Process ControlDesign of control systems for chemical processes. Principles of process dynamics and control of single and multivariable systems. Frequency and stability analyses and their effect on controller design. Prerequisite: CHBE2250; MATH 2400 or 2420. FALL. [3]

CHBE3860 - Undergraduate ResearchOpportunities for individual students to do research under the guidance of a faculty member. Requires faculty sponsorship of the project. [1-3 each semester]

CHBE3861 - Undergraduate ResearchOpportunities for individual students to do research under the guidance of a faculty member. Requires faculty sponsorship of the project. [1-3 each semester]

CHBE3890 - Special Topics[Variable credit: 0-3 each semester]

CHBE3900W - Chemical Engineering Laboratory ILaboratory experiments in momentum, energy and mass transport, focusing on chemical engineeringfundamentals, instrumentation, and unit operations. Statistical treatment of data, error analysis, and experimental design. Written reports, oral presentations, and laboratory safety are emphasized. One 5-hour laboratory per week. Prerequisite: CHBE 2100, CHBE 2250, CHBE 2900W, CHBE 3300. Corequisite: CHBE 3350.SPRING. [3]

CHBE4200 - Additive and Polymer-based ManufacturingScaling up prototypes through industrial processes. Operating principles of advanced forms of 3D printing (stereolithography and powder bed fusion). How properties of polymeric, ceramic, and metallic materials inform the 3D printing process and certification of printed parts. Computer-aided modeling of manufactured parts with a focus on minimizing anisotropic properties and dimensional instability. Fundamentals of polymer melt flow and simulation in mold cavities to optimize part fabrication. Students design a prototype injection mold and iterate on their design using flow simulation software and 3D printing. Prerequisite: DF 2100. FALL. [3].

CHBE4500 - Bioprocess EngineeringApplication of cellular and molecular biology to process engineering to describe the manufacture of products derived from cell cultures. Design and scale-up of bioreactors and separation equipment. Metabolic and protein engineering utilizing genetically engineered organisms. Prerequisite: BSCI 1510 or CHBE 2150; CHBE 3250, CHBE 3300. [3]

CHBE4800 - The Molecular and Cellular MechanomeApplications of molecular and cellular biophysics and mechanics over various lengths, energy and timescales to describe biological phenomena through an 'omics' systems level perspective to molecular motors, cell machinery, mechanotransduction, cell migration, cell division, and nonequilibrium receptor ligand interactions.Physical and engineering based descriptions of molecular and cellular machinery incorporating biophysics and statistical and continuum mechanics perspectives. Modern and historical results, instrumentation, and measurement techniques. Prerequisite: Junior standing. FALL. [3]

CHBE4805 - Biomolecular Engineering and DesignApproaches for interrogating and controlling biological function on a molecular and cellular level. Applications to biotechnology fields such as diagnostics, therapeutics, and regenerative medicine. Focus areas include concepts of molecular recognition, extracellular and intracellular signal transduction, protein engineering, genome engineering, cellular engineering, and tissue engineering. Prerequisites: ChBE 2150 or BSCI 1510. [3]

CHBE4810 - Metabolic EngineeringAnalysis and synthesis of metabolic networks using principles of thermodynamics, kinetics, and transport phenomena. Computational approaches for predicting metabolic phenotypes. Experimental techniques tomeasure and manipulate key metabolic variables including pathway fluxes, protein/gene expression, enzyme regulation, and intracellular metabolite concentrations. Prerequisite: BSCI 1510 or CHBE 2150; junior standing.[3]

CHBE4820 - ImmunoengineeringApproaches and technologies for manipulating and studying the immune system. Topics include fundamentals of immunology, immunology tools and methods, vaccines and immunotherapies, drug delivery principles, and materials engineering for immunomodulation. Prerequisite: ChBE 2150 or BSCI 1510. [3]

CHBE4830 - Molecular SimulationModern tools of statistical mechanics, such as Monte Carlo and molecular dynamics simulation, and variations.Methods, capabilities, and limitations of molecular simulation and applications to simple and complex fluids relevant to the chemical and related processing industries. Prerequisite: CHBE 3200, CHEM 3300. [3]

CHBE4840 - Synthesis and Applications of 2D NanomaterialsStructure-property relationships and applications of atomically thin, two-dimensional materials and 2D/layered systems. Preparation by mechanical exfoliation, solution processing, and bottom-up synthesis.Nucleation/growth of 2D materials via gas/solid, liquid/solid, and catalytic/phase transformation reactions.Kinetic vs. thermodynamic processing, stabilizing meta-stable intermediates, interface engineering, and scale-up. Prerequisite: CHEM 1602 or MSE 1500; junior standing. [3]

CHBE4850 - Semiconductor Materials ProcessingMaterials processing unit operations of silicon device manufacturing. Basic semiconductor physics and device theory, production of substrates, dopant diffusion, ion implantation, thermal oxidation and deposition processes, plasma deposition processes, photolithography, wet chemical and plasma etching, and analytical techniques.Lectures alternate with one two-hour laboratory on a weekly basis. FALL. [3]

CHBE4860 - Molecular Aspects of Chemical EngineeringIntegration of molecular chemistry, property-based thermodynamic descriptions, and a focus on intermolecular energetics for process analysis and product design. Case studies involve molecular, macromolecular,supramolecular, and biomolecular systems. Prerequisite: CHEM 2211 or 2221; CHBE 2200. [3]

CHBE4870 - Polymer Science and EngineeringMacromolecular systems with emphasis on the interrelationship of chemical, physical, and engineering properties. Further relation of these properties to synthesis. Physicochemical and biological applications.Prerequisite: CHBE 2200, a basic understanding of organic and physical chemistry. [3]

CHBE4875 - Colloid Science and EngineeringFundamental concepts (surface forces, self-assembly, electrokinetics) and experimental techniques(microscopy, scattering, measurement of charge) in colloid science. Applications to personal care products, energy devices, and drug delivery. Prerequisite: ChBE 2200, ChBE 3300. [3]

CHBE4880 - Corrosion Science and EngineeringAqueous-phase metal and alloy corrosion phenomena. Fundamental chemistry and electrochemistry theories, as applied to corroding systems. Specific forms of corrosion including pitting, crevice corrosion, and galvanic corrosion. Methods for corrosion control based on electrochemical fundamentals. Prerequisite: CHBE 3300.SPRING. [3]

CHBE4900W - Chemical Engineering Laboratory IILaboratory experiments in unit operations covering reactions and separations. Interpretation of data for equipment and process design. Methods of hazard analysis, their application to lab-scale unit operations, and the scale-up of chemical processes from laboratory data. Written reports and oral presentations areemphasized. One 5-hour laboratory per week. Prerequisite: CHBE 3200, CHBE 3250, CHBE 3350, CHBE 3900Wor BME 3900W or CHEM 3315. FALL. [3]

CHBE4950W - Chemical Engineering Process and Product DesignA systematic approach to design and safety practices for chemical process operations leading to theidentification of a team-based capstone design project. Design, economic evaluation of alternatives, ethics, and cost and safety analysis of chemical, biological, and petroleum process and products. Systems-based process integration design methodologies. Steady-state simulation using chemical engineering design software. Three lecture hours and one two-hour laboratory each week. Prerequisite: CHBE 3200, CHBE 3250, CHBE 3350. FALL.[4]

CHBE4951W - Chemical Engineering Design ProjectsContinuation of a team-based design project from ChBE 4950W. Evaluations through periodic oral and written presentations, a final written report, and a poster report. Emphasis on design tools and methodologies, economic assessment, and hazard analysis leading to a recommended chemical product or process design that meets key safety and economic criteria. Prerequisite: CHBE 4950W. SPRING. [3]

CHBE4959 - Professional Practice of Safety in Chemical Engineering DesignElements of professional engineering practice. Hazard analysis methodologies applied to chemical products and processes are emphasized and applied to lab-scale unit operations. Professional practice of the design of safe chemical products and processes is examined through case studies. Corequisite: ChBE 4950W. FALL. [1]

CHEM1001 - Commons iSeminarTopics vary. General Elective credit only. [1] (No AXLE Credit)

CHEM1010 - Introductory ChemistryGeneral principles for non-science majors or those not planning on taking additional chemistry courses. The periodic table, chemical reactions, properties of solutions, and atmospheric chemistry with connections to global environmental issues. No prior chemistry experience required. Not a prerequisite for advanced courses in chemistry. Not open to students who have earned credit for CHEM 1601, 2211, or 2221 without permission.Total credit for this course and 1601, 2211, or 2221 will not exceed 3 credit hours. Credit reduced from second course taken (or test or transfer credit) as appropriate. [3] (MNS)

CHEM1010L - Introductory Chemistry LaboratoryLaboratory to accompany 1010. One three-hour laboratory per week. Satisfies the AXLE lab course requirement when completed with 1010. Not open to students who have earned credit for CHEM 1601L or 2221L without permission. Total credit for this course and 1601L or 2221L will not exceed 1 credit hour. Credit reduced from second course taken (or test or transfer credit) as appropriate. Corequisite: 1010. [1] (No AXLE credit) CHEM1020 - Introductory Chemistry

Laboratory to accompany 1010. One three-hour laboratory per week. Satisfies the AXLE lab course requirement when completed with 1010. Not open to students who have earned credit for CHEM 1601L or 2221L without permission. Total credit for this course and 1601L or 2221L will not exceed 1 credit hour. Credit reduced from second course taken (or test or transfer credit) as appropriate. Corequisite: 1010. [1] (No AXLE credit) CHEM1020 - Introductory ChemistryGeneral principles for non-science majors or those not planning on taking additional chemistry courses.Chemistry of water, basic nuclear chemistry, organic and biochemistry, with discussion of the chemistry of common medicines and nutritional chemistry. No prior chemistry experience required. Not a prerequisite for advanced courses in chemistry. Not open to students who have earned credit for CHEM 1602, 2212, or 2222without permission. Total credit for this course and 1602, 2212, or 2222 will not exceed 3 credit hours. Credit reduced from second course taken (or test or transfer credit) as appropriate. [3] (MNS)

CHEM1020L - Introductory Chemistry LaboratoryLaboratory to accompany 1020. One three-hour laboratory per week. Satisfies the AXLE lab course requirement when completed with 1020. Not open to students who have earned credit for CHEM 1602L or 2222L without permission. Total credit for this course and 1602L or 2222L will not exceed 1 credit hour. Credit reduced from second course taken (or test or transfer credit) as appropriate. Corequisite: 1020. [1] (No AXLE credit) CHEM1030 - The Chemistry of French Culture

Laboratory to accompany 1020. One three-hour laboratory per week. Satisfies the AXLE lab course requirement when completed with 1020. Not open to students who have earned credit for CHEM 1602L or 2222L without permission. Total credit for this course and 1602L or 2222L will not exceed 1 credit hour. Credit reduced from second course taken (or test or transfer credit) as appropriate. Corequisite: 1020. [1] (No AXLE credit) CHEM1030 - The Chemistry of French CultureChemistry through the lens of French culture: food, art, terroir, and the commitment to sustainability. Taught in English. Intended for non-science majors. No prior chemistry experience required; not a prerequisite for advanced courses in chemistry. Not open to students who have earned credit for CHEM 1601, 2211, or 2221without permission. Total credit for this course and 1601, 2211, or 2221 will not exceed 3 credit hours. Credit reduced from second course taken (or test or transfer credit) as appropriate. [3] (MNS)

CHEM1111 - First-Year Writing SeminarIndependent learning and inquiry in an environment in which students can express knowledge and defend opinions through intensive class discussion, oral presentations, and written expression. May be repeated for credit once if there is no duplication of topic, but students may earn only up to 3 credits in any 1111 course per semester of enrollment. [3; maximum of 6 credits total for all semesters of 1111] (AXLE credit category varies by section)

CHEM1601 - General ChemistryGeneral principles of chemistry for science and engineering students. Composition and structure of matter, chemical reactions, bonding, solution chemistry, and kinetics. Thermodynamics, equilibrium, acids and bases, electrochemistry, and coordination compounds. Three lectures per week and a recitation period. Not open to students who have earned credit for CHEM 1010 without permission. Serves as repeat credit for 1010.Corequisite: 1601L. [3] (MNS)

CHEM1601L - General Chemistry LaboratoryLaboratory to accompany 1601. One three-hour laboratory per week. Satisfies the AXLE lab course requirement when completed with 1601. Not open to students who have earned credit for CHEM 1010L without permission.Serves as repeat credit for CHEM 1010L. Prerequisite or corequisite: 1601. [1] (No AXLE credit)

CHEM1602 - General ChemistryContinuation of 1601. General principles of chemistry for science and engineering students. Composition and structure of matter, chemical reactions, bonding, solution chemistry, and kinetics. Thermodynamics, equilibrium, acids and bases, electrochemistry, and coordination compounds. Three lectures per week and a recitation period. Not open to students who have earned credit for CHEM 1020 without permission. Serves as repeat credit for 1020. Prerequisite: 1601. Corequisite: 1602L. [3] (MNS)

CHEM1602L - General Chemistry LaboratoryLaboratory to accompany 1602. One three-hour laboratory per week. Satisfies the AXLE lab course requirement when completed with 1602. Not open to students who have earned credit for CHEM 1020L without permission.Serves as repeat credit for CHEM 1020L. Prerequisite: 1601L. Corequisite: 1602. [1] (No AXLE credit) CHEM2100 - Introduction to Analytical Chemistry

Serves as repeat credit for CHEM 1020L. Prerequisite: 1601L. Corequisite: 1602. [1] (No AXLE credit) CHEM2100 - Introduction to Analytical ChemistryFundamental quantitative analytical chemistry with emphasis on principles of analysis, separations, equilibria, stoichiometry and spectrophotometry. Corequisite: 2100L. [3] (MNS)

CHEM2100L - Analytical Chemistry LaboratoryLaboratory to accompany Chemistry 2100. One four-hour laboratory per week. Satisfies the AXLE lab course requirement when completed with 2100. Prerequisite or corequisite: 2100. [1] (No AXLE credit)

CHEM2211 - Organic Chemistry for Advanced Placement StudentsFundamental types of organic compounds; their nomenclature, classification, preparations, reactions, and general application. Three hours of lecture and one hour of recitation each week. Not open to students who have earned credit for CHEM 2221. Total credit for this course and CHEM 2221 will not exceed 3 credit hours.Prerequisite: enrollment limited to first-year students with advanced placement chemistry scores of 5, or the approval of the director of undergraduate studies. Corequisite: 2221L. [3] (MNS)

CHEM2212 - Organic Chemistry for Advanced Placement StudentsContinuation of 2211. Fundamental types of organic compounds; their nomenclature, classification,preparations, reactions, and general application. Three hours of lecture and one hour of recitation each week.Not open to students who have earned credit for CHEM 2222. Total credit for this course and CHEM 2222 will not exceed 3 hours. Prerequisite: enrollment limited to first-year students with advanced placement chemistry scores of 5, or 2211, or the approval of the director of undergraduate studies. Corequisite: 2222L. [3] (MNS) CHEM2221 - Organic Chemistry

Not open to students who have earned credit for CHEM 2222. Total credit for this course and CHEM 2222 will not exceed 3 hours. Prerequisite: enrollment limited to first-year students with advanced placement chemistry scores of 5, or 2211, or the approval of the director of undergraduate studies. Corequisite: 2222L. [3] (MNS) CHEM2221 - Organic ChemistryFundamental types of organic compounds. Nomenclature and classification. Preparations, reactions, and general application. Three hours of lecture and one hour of recitation each week. Serves as repeat credit for CHEM 2211.No credit for graduate students in chemistry. Prerequisite: 1602. Corequisite: 2221L. [3] (MNS)

CHEM2221L - Organic Chemistry LaboratoryLaboratory to accompany 2211 or 2221. One four-hour laboratory per week. Satisfies the AXLE lab course requirement when completed with 2211 or 2221. Prerequisite or corequisite: 2211 or 2221. [1] (No AXLE credit) CHEM2222 - Organic Chemistry

Laboratory to accompany 2211 or 2221. One four-hour laboratory per week. Satisfies the AXLE lab course requirement when completed with 2211 or 2221. Prerequisite or corequisite: 2211 or 2221. [1] (No AXLE credit) CHEM2222 - Organic ChemistryContinuation of 2221. Fundamental types of organic compounds. Nomenclature and classification. Preparations, reactions, and general application. Three hours of lecture and one hour of recitation each week. Serves as repeat credit for CHEM 2212. Prerequisite: 2211 or 2221. Corequisite: 2222L. [3] (MNS)

CHEM2222L - Organic Chemistry LaboratoryLaboratory to accompany 2212 or 2222. One four-hour laboratory per week. Satisfies the AXLE lab course requirement when completed with 2212 or 2222. Prerequisite or corequisite: 2212 or 2222. [1] (No AXLE credit) CHEM2610 - Introduction to Nanochemistry

Laboratory to accompany 2212 or 2222. One four-hour laboratory per week. Satisfies the AXLE lab course requirement when completed with 2212 or 2222. Prerequisite or corequisite: 2212 or 2222. [1] (No AXLE credit) CHEM2610 - Introduction to NanochemistrySynthesis, characterization, and assembly of nanoscale materials. No credit for graduate students in chemistry.Prerequisite: 1602. [3] (MNS)

CHEM3010 - Inorganic ChemistryA survey of modern inorganic chemistry including coordination compounds and the compounds of the main-group elements. Representative reactions and current theories are treated. Prerequisite or corequisite: 3300 or 3310. [3] (MNS)

CHEM3020 - Introduction to Bioinorganic ChemistryFunctions of inorganic elements in living cells. The manner in which coordination can modify the properties of metallic ions in living systems. Prerequisite: 2212 or 2222. [3] (MNS)

CHEM3120 - Instrumental Analytical ChemistryChemical and physical principles of modern analytical chemistry instrumentation. Prerequisite: 2100 and either 2212 or 2222. [3] (MNS)

CHEM3135W - Forensic Analytical ChemistryTechniques, methodologies, data collection, and interpretation. Laboratory experience with drug analysis, toxicology, trace, and arson analysis. Two hours of lecture and one four-hour laboratory per week. Prerequisite: 2100 and 2100L. [3] (MNS)

CHEM3220 - Spectroscopic Identification of Organic CompoundsTheoretical and practical aspects of spectroscopic methods, with an emphasis on NMR spectroscopy, for structural characterization of organic compounds. Prerequisite: 2212 or 2222. [3] (MNS)

CHEM3300 - Physical Chemistry: Quantum Mechanics, Spectroscopy, and KineticsChemical kinetics and principles of quantum chemistry applied to molecular structure, bonding, andspectroscopy. Prior study of multivariable calculus is expected. No credit for graduate students in chemistry.Prerequisite or corequisite: PHYS 1501, 1601, or 1911. Prerequisite: MATH 1201 or 1301. [3] (MNS)

CHEM3310 - Physical Chemistry: Chemical Thermodynamics and EquilibriumChemical thermodynamics and equilibrium, their statistical foundation, and applications to chemicalphenomena. Prerequisite or corequisite: PHYS 1501, 1601, or 1911. Prerequisite: MATH 1201 or 1301. [3] (MNS) CHEM3315 - Physical Chemistry Laboratory

phenomena. Prerequisite or corequisite: PHYS 1501, 1601, or 1911. Prerequisite: MATH 1201 or 1301. [3] (MNS) CHEM3315 - Physical Chemistry LaboratoryExperiments in chemical thermodynamics and kinetics. Data analysis and presentation. No credit for graduate students in chemistry. One three-hour laboratory or one lecture per week. Calculus through Math 2300recommended. Prerequisite: 2222L and either MATH 1201 or 1301. [1] (No AXLE credit)

CHEM3320 - Biophysical ChemistryApplications of chemical thermodynamics, kinetics, quantum chemistry, and spectroscopy in biochemistry and chemical biology. Students interested in an in-depth coverage of these topics are recommended to take CHEM3300 and CHEM 3310 sequence; not open to students who have completed 3300 and 3310. This course is not eligible for the chemistry major; it is eligible for the chemistry minor. Prerequisite or corequisite: PHYS 1501, 1601, or 1911. Prerequisite: MATH 1201 or 1301; and BSCI 1510. [3] (MNS)

CHEM3333 - Special OfferingTopics vary by section and instructor. May be repeated for credit; students may register for more than one section of this course in the same semester. Not eligible toward the major or minor. [3] (MNS)

CHEM3600 - Chemical LiteratureAssigned readings and problems in the nature and use of the chemical literature. Prerequisite: 2212 or 2222. [1]

CHEM3630 - Macromolecular Chemistry: Polymers, Dendrimers, and Surface ModificationsSynthesis and characterization of macromolecular materials including linear, branched, dendrimetric, and star polymers. Mechanical and physiochemical properties of polymeric types. Kinetics of living polymerization.Applications to nanostructures, templates, and advanced devices. Prerequisite: 1602. [3] (MNS)

CHEM3710 - Bioorganic ChemistryEssential metabolites including vitamins, steroids, peptides, and nucleotides. Consideration of phosphate esters and the synthesis of oligodeoxynucleotides. Three lectures per week. Prerequisite: 2212 or 2222. [3] (MNS) CHEM3715 - Chemistry of the Coral Reef

Essential metabolites including vitamins, steroids, peptides, and nucleotides. Consideration of phosphate esters and the synthesis of oligodeoxynucleotides. Three lectures per week. Prerequisite: 2212 or 2222. [3] (MNS) CHEM3715 - Chemistry of the Coral ReefApplication of quantitative analytical chemistry techniques and spectroscopic methods to characterize molecules with potential materials chemistry or medicinal chemistry applications. In-depth chemistry research experience; mandatory participation in all scheduled field research and laboratory sessions. Prerequisite: 2100, 2100L, 2222, 2222L [3] (MNS)

CHEM3841 - Readings for HonorsOpen only to students in the departmental honors program. General reading supervised by research adviser. [2]

CHEM3842 - Readings for HonorsOpen only to students in the departmental honors program. Continuation of 3841, with emphasis on research planned. [2] (No AXLE credit)

CHEM3860 - Undergraduate ResearchOpen to students who have earned at least 8 hours of credit and a minimum GPA of 2.7 in chemistry, with consent of the director of undergraduate studies and the sponsoring faculty member. May be repeated for credit more than once if there is no duplication in topic, but students may earn only up to 3 credits per semester of enrollment. [1-3] (No AXLE credit)

CHEM3902 - Pedagogy for Chemical Education[Previously listed as CHEM 2620] Pedagogical techniques for the chemistry classroom. Knowledge application in discussion sections and development of teaching materials. Consent of Instructor required for registration.

CHEM3980 - Honors ResearchOpen only to students in the departmental honors program. Original research supervised by research adviser, to be reported in thesis form with oral examination thereon. [2-4]

CHEM4050 - Introduction to Organometallic ChemistryA general description of the preparation, reaction chemistry, molecular structure, bonding, and spectroscopic identification of organometallic compounds of the transition metals. Prerequisite or co-requisite: 3010 or 3020.[3] (MNS)

CHEM4210 - Organic Chemistry Structure and MechanismStereochemistry and conformational analysis; mechanisms of organic reactions; linear free-energy relationships; reactive intermediates. Three lectures and one recitation hour per week. Serves as repeat credit for CHEM 5210.Not open to students who have earned credit for 5209 without permission. Total credit for this course and CHEM5209 will not exceed 4 hours. Credit reduced from most recent course taken (or from test or transfer credit) as appropriate. Prerequisite: either 2212 or 2222 and either 3300 or 3311. [4] (MNS)

CHEM4230 - Physical Organic ChemistryStructure and bonding in organic molecules. Reactive intermediates and organic reaction mechanisms.Prerequisite: 3300 or 3310. [3] (MNS)

CHEM4240 - Advanced Organic ReactionsA comprehensive study of organic reactions and their application to the preparation of small molecules.Prerequisite: 4210. Three lectures per week. [3] (MNS)

CHEM4350 - Statistical ThermodynamicsStatistical mechanics and chemical equilibrium. Distribution laws, partition functions, and thermodynamic properties of atoms and molecules. Applications to gases, liquids, and solids. Prerequisite: either 3300 or 3310, and Math 2300. [3] (MNS)

CHEM4720 - Drug Design and DevelopmentConcepts of drug design; physical chemistry of drug interactions with receptors, enzymes, and DNA; drug absorption and distribution. Organic chemistry of drug metabolism; mechanism of action for selectedtherapeutic classes. Prerequisite: 3710 or BSCI 2520. [3] (MNS)

CHEM4965 - Advanced Integrated LaboratoryMultidisciplinary laboratory projects. Experimental design, synthetic techniques, chemical analysis, spectroscopy, and computational methods. Offered on a graded basis only. Limited to senior majors.Prerequisite: 2100, 2100L. [3] (No AXLE credit)

CHEM4966 - Advanced Integrated LaboratoryContinuation of 4965. Offered on a graded basis only. Limited to senior majors. Prerequisite: 4965. [3] (No AXLE

CHEM4980 - Honors ResearchOpen only to students in the departmental honors program. Original research supervised by research adviser, to be reported in thesis form with oral examination thereon. [2-4] (No AXLE credit)

CHEM4999 - Honors ResearchOpen only to students in the departmental honors program. Original research supervised by research adviser, to be reported in thesis form with oral examination thereon. [2] (No AXLE credit)

CHIN1011 - Basic ChineseDesigned exclusively for students with no previous exposure to the language. The basic pronunciation, grammar, and writing system of Mandarin Chinese. Simple conversation, the pinyin Romanization system, basic Chinese characters, and cultural elements embedded in the language. No credit for students who have earned credit for 1101 or a more advanced Chinese language course. [3] (No AXLE credit)

CHIN1012 - Basic ChineseContinuation of 1011. No credit for students who have earned credit for 1101 or a more advanced Chinese language course. Prerequisite: 1011. [3] (No AXLE credit)

CHIN1101 - Elementary Chinese IIntroduction to Modern Chinese pronunciation, grammar, conversation, reading, and writing. Two hours of lecture and three hours of drill per week. No credit for students who have earned credit for 1012 or a more advanced Chinese language course. [5] (No AXLE credit)

CHIN1102 - Elementary Chinese IIContinuation of 1101. Introduction to Modern Chinese pronunciation, grammar, conversation, reading, and writing. Two hours of lecture and three hours of drill per week. No credit for students who have earned credit for a more advanced Chinese language course. Prerequisite: 1012 or 1101. [5] (INT)

CHIN1231 - CalligraphyBasic skills of writing standard script kaishu. Basic aesthetic of Chinese calligraphy. No Chinese language background necessary. [1] (No AXLE credit)

CHIN2201 - Intermediate Chinese IOral and written language training. Two hours of lecture and three hours of drill per week. No credit for students who have earned credit for a more advanced Chinese language course. Prerequisite: 1102. [5] (INT)

CHIN2202 - Intermediate Chinese IIContinuation of 2201. Language training in oral and written Chinese. Two hours of lecture and three hours of drill per week. No credit for students who have earned credit for a more advanced Chinese language course.Prerequisite: 2201. [5] (INT)

CHIN2211 - Chinese for Heritage Learners IIntended for students who have some informal training in listening and speaking Mandarin Chinese. Basic literacy and other aspects of language proficiency. Offered on a graded basis only. No credit for students who have earned credit for a more advanced Chinese language course. [3] (INT)

CHIN2212 - Chinese for Heritage Learners IIContinuation of 2211. Intended for students who have some informal training in listening and speaking Mandarin Chinese. Basic literacy and other aspects of language proficiency. Offered on a graded basis only. No credit for students who have earned credit for a more advanced Chinese language course. Prerequisite: 2211. [3] (INT) CHIN3301 - Advanced Chinese I

Continuation of 2211. Intended for students who have some informal training in listening and speaking Mandarin Chinese. Basic literacy and other aspects of language proficiency. Offered on a graded basis only. No credit for students who have earned credit for a more advanced Chinese language course. Prerequisite: 2211. [3] (INT) CHIN3301 - Advanced Chinese IReadings in Chinese culture to enhance proficiency in oral and written Chinese. No credit for students who have earned credit for a more advanced Chinese language course. Prerequisite: 2202. [3] (INT)

CHIN3302 - Advanced Chinese IIContinuation of 3301. Readings in Chinese culture to enhance proficiency in oral and written Chinese. No credit for students who have earned credit for a more advanced Chinese language course. Prerequisite: 3301. [3] (INT) CHIN3302W - Advanced Chinese II

Continuation of 3301. Readings in Chinese culture to enhance proficiency in oral and written Chinese. No credit for students who have earned credit for a more advanced Chinese language course. Prerequisite: 3301. [3] (INT) CHIN3302W - Advanced Chinese IIReading and writing essays about modern Chinese culture and society. Repeat credit for 3302. No credit for students who have earned credit for a more advanced Chinese language course. Graded basis only.Prerequisite: 3301. [3] (INT)

CHIN3851 - Independent StudyDesigned primarily for majors who want to study Chinese not regularly offered in the curriculum. Must have consent of instructor. May be repeated for a total of 12 credits in 3851 and 3852 combined if there is no duplication in topic, but students may earn only up to 3 credits per semester of enrollment. [1-3; maximum 12

CHIN3852 - Independent StudyDesigned primarily for majors who want to study Chinese not regularly offered in the curriculum. Must have consent of instructor. May be repeated for a total of 12 credits in 3851 and 3852 combined if there is no duplication in topic, but students may earn only up to 3 credits per semester of enrollment. [1-3; maximum 12

CHIN4001 - Fourth-year Conversational ChineseIdiomatic usage and strategies for oral communication and understanding of Chinese urban culture and society.Texts drawn from short TV clips reflecting ordinary lives of Beijing people. Prerequisite: 3302. [2]

CHIN4002 - 4th-Year Conversational Chinese IIContinuation of 4001. Idiomatic usage and strategies for oral communication and understanding of Chinese urban culture and society. Texts drawn from short TV clips reflecting ordinary lives of Beijing people.Prerequisite: 3302. [2] (No AXLE credit)

CHIN4401 - Business Chinese ILanguage skills for listening, speaking, reading, and writing in business environments. Modern China from economic and business perspectives. No credit for students who have earned credit for a more advanced Chinese language course. Prerequisite: 3302 or 3302W. [3] (INT)

CHIN4402 - Business Chinese IIContinuation of 4401. Language skills for listening, speaking, reading, and writing in business environments.Modern China from economic and business perspectives. Prerequisite: 4401. [3] (INT)

CHIN4403 - Readings in Modern Chinese MediaBooks, newspapers, Internet, and television documents and productions pertaining to political, social, and economic issues in China, including foreign trade-related issues. Prerequisite: 3302 or 3302W. [3] (INT) CHIN4404 - Readings in Modern Chinese Media

Books, newspapers, Internet, and television documents and productions pertaining to political, social, and economic issues in China, including foreign trade-related issues. Prerequisite: 3302 or 3302W. [3] (INT) CHIN4404 - Readings in Modern Chinese MediaContinuation of 4403. Books, newspapers, and Internet sources pertaining to political, social, and cultural issues. Prerequisite: 3302 or 3302W. [3] (INT)

CHIN4405 - Classical Chinese Literature and PhilosophyClassical writings by Confucius, Sunzi, and Zhuangzi. Poems by Li Bai and Du Fu. Excerpts from The Dream of the Red Chamber. Linguistic comparisons between classical and modern Chinese. Prerequisite: 3302 or 3302W.[3] (INT)

CHIN4406 - Readings in Modern Literary Chinese1910 to the present. Chinese literature and poetry. Linguistic transformations that produced modern literary Chinese. Prerequisite: 3302 or 3302W. [3] (INT)

CMA1001 - Commons iSeminarTopics vary. General Elective credit only. [1] (No AXLE credit)

CMA1002W - Moving Images and Analytical ThinkingMoving images and new media from various genres, periods, and national contexts. May be repeated for credit once if there is no duplication in topic. Offered on a graded basis only. [3] (HCA)

CMA1111 - First-Year Writing SeminarIndependent learning and inquiry in an environment in which students can express knowledge and defend opinions through intensive class discussion, oral presentations, and written expression. May be repeated for credit once if there is no duplication of topic, but students may earn only up to 3 credits in any 1111 course per semester of enrollment. [3; maximum of 6 credits total for all semesters of 1111] (AXLE credit category varies by section)

CMA1200 - War on ScreenRepresentations of World War II and the fight against Nazi Germany in Hollywood and other cinemas,contemporary video games, television, and installation art. How current modes of warfare and the global war on terror have changed the conventions of depicting war. Taught in English. [3] (HCA)

CMA1400 - Introduction to Video GamesScholarly study and technical production of immersive digital experiences. Economic and cultural landscape of video games. No prior experience needed; open to students of all backgrounds and majors. [3] (HCA)

CMA1500 - Fundamentals of Film and Video ProductionTechnologies and techniques of filmmaking. Digital video cameras, staging and lighting, sound recording, post-production sound, and image editing. Offered on a graded basis only. [3] (HCA)

CMA1600 - Introduction to Film and Media StudiesStylistic tendencies and narrative strategies, genres, and theoretical approaches. Live-action cinema, animation, experimental cinema, television, and computer-generated moving images. [3] (HCA)

CMA1820W - Virtual WorldsVirtual reality promises to immerse users in places and moments that were once inaccessible. History of human attempts to conquer space and time to achieve "presence" with the distant past, faraway lands, future, and even God. Students design and create analog or digital experiences using virtual worlds as a storytelling device.[3] (P)

CMA2100 - Digtial Storytelling, Interactive Narratives and Digital MemoryImpact of digital technologies on narrative, identity, and social memory through readings and creative digital projects. Unique benefits of digital media for effective and meaningful storytelling. Social function and art of storytelling across a variety of digital applications and platforms. No prior technological skills or media arts experience necessary. Offered on a graded basis only. [3] (HCA)

CMA2240 - Narrative FilmmakingFictional media production. Art and practice of scripted storytelling for cinema, television, and digital media.Offered on a graded basis only. Not open to students who completed CMA 3891-01 offered fall 2022.Prerequisite: 1500. [3] (HCA)

CMA2250 - 16mm FilmmakingCamera operation, lighting, non-sync sound design, and film pre-production for 16 mm and celluloid film.Offered on a graded basis only. Prerequisite 1500. [3] (No AXLE credit)

CMA2260 - Digital Production WorkshopDigital cinematography, sound design, and editing. Individual and group projects. Offered on a graded basis only. Prerequisite 1500. [3] (No AXLE credit)

CMA2270 - Documentary FilmmakingNonfiction media production. History, theory, practice, and ethical considerations of nonfiction modes. Offered on a graded basis only. Not open to students who completed CMA 3891-02 offered spring 2022. Prerequisite: 1500. [3] (HCA)

CMA2290 - Alternate Media ModesGenres, styles, and techniques outside of the dominant modes of media-making. Emphasis on production.Offered on a graded basis only. [3] (HCA)

CMA2300 - Film and Media TheoryCMA2301 - Race in Film and MediaCourse DescriptionRacialization through cinema and modern media's infrastructures and aesthetics. Imbrication of race and audiovisual culture in wider cultural contexts, such as the histories of capitalism, the Civil Rights movement, and questions of gender and sexuality. [3] (HCA)

CMA2301 - Race in Film and MediaRacialization through cinema and modern media's infrastructures and aesthetics. Imbrication of race and audiovisual culture in wider cultural contexts, such as the histories of capitalism, the Civil Rights movement, and questions of gender and sexuality. [3] (HCA)

CMA2302 - Global Queer Cinema and MediaAesthetics and circulation of queer cinema in different national and transnational contexts. Impacts of queer cinema and theory in relation to globalization, diaspora, and transnational politics. [3] (HCA)

CMA2370 - Film and Media AestheticsCinema, television, and digital media. Advanced historical, cultural, and textual analysis. Form, genre, movements, style, and technology. [3] (HCA)

CMA2400 - History of World CinemaSurvey of world film history from 1895 to the present. Key films and filmmakers. Historical, aesthetic, national, and political contexts of films and film movements. Prerequisite: 1600. [3] (HCA)

CMA2500W - ScreenwritingTechniques of screenwriting. [3] (HCA)

CMA2510W - Writing for the Stage and ScreenTechniques for writing plays and screenplays with critical attention to dramatic themes and characterization. [3]

CMA2530W - Modern Israeli CultureSocial and cultural history of modern Israel from the establishment of the State in 1948 to the present.Representations of national identity, collective belonging, and historical memory in public culture. Offered on a graded basis only. [3] (INT)

CMA2600W - Advanced ScreenwritingStory structure, character development, and dialogue. Prerequisite: 2500W. [3] (HCA)

CMA2610 - A History of German FilmA curated presentation of the history of German cinema with special emphasis on its sociocultural contexts and artistic achievements. Discussion will include pertinent theories of cinematography and cinematic narration.Taught in English. [3] (INT)

CMA3257 - Virtual Reality DesignInterdisciplinary, project-based introduction to Virtual Reality (VR). Creation of immersive environments. Student projects guided by faculty mentors to create real-world, consequential VR simulations relevant to, and innovative in, their respective fields. Note: This class is not open to students with a Computer Science major or minor, CS students should enroll in CS 4249. Serves as repeat credit for students who have completed UNIV3279. [3] (MNS)

CMA3333 - Special OfferingsTopics vary by section and instructor. May be repeated for credit; students may register for more than one section of this course in the same semester. [3]

CMA3726 - New MediaHistory, theory, and design of digital media. Literature, video, film, online games, and other interactive narratives. Not open to students who have completed ENGL 1111 section 60. Serves as repeat credit for CMA 3333 01, section 01 in Fall 2020, and for ENGL 3333, section 01 in Fall 2020. [3] (HCA)

CMA3770 - Russian CinemaMasterpieces of Russian and Soviet cinema from the silent period to the present. Montage theory, propaganda film, politics of the art house, and rise of the Russian blockbuster. Films by master directors Eisenstein, Vertov, Tarkovsky, Sokurov, and Zvyagintsev. Soviet musicals and contemporary popular cinema. Knowledge of Russian not required. [3] (INT)

CMA3771 - Global Korean CinemaFrom the colonial period to the Korean Wave in the new millennium. Film criticism, transnational and national contexts of film production, aesthetics of auteurs and genres, and local and global receptions of Korean cinema.[3] (INT)

CMA3772 - French and Francophone CinemaThe themes and art of film in France and the French-speaking world. Offered in French at Vanderbilt in France and in English at Nashville. When offered in English, this course does not count toward the minor, and writing must be done in French to count toward the major. [3] (INT)

CMA3773 - Classic Italian CinemaFrom the 1910s to the 1970s. Selected works from Neorealism to Art Film. Relationship between cinema and the other arts. Contrasting film styles, including abstraction and realism, and tradition and transgression.Knowledge of Italian is not required. [3] (INT)

CMA3774 - Contemporary Italian CinemaCMA3850 - Independent StudyCourse DescriptionProjects are arranged with individual professors and must be confirmed by the director of Cinema and Media Arts within two weeks of the beginning of classes; otherwise the student will be dropped from the rolls. [Variable credit: 1-3 each semester. Limit of 6 hours for 3850 and 3851 combined for majors.] (No AXLE credit) CMA3851 - Independent Study

CMA3850 - Independent StudyProjects are arranged with individual professors and must be confirmed by the director of Cinema and Media Arts within two weeks of the beginning of classes; otherwise the student will be dropped from the rolls. [Variable credit: 1-3 each semester. Limit of 6 hours for 3850 and 3851 combined for majors.] (No AXLE credit) CMA3851 - Independent Study

Projects are arranged with individual professors and must be confirmed by the director of Cinema and Media Arts within two weeks of the beginning of classes; otherwise the student will be dropped from the rolls. [Variable credit: 1-3 each semester. Limit of 6 hours for 3850 and 3851 combined for majors.] (No AXLE credit) CMA3851 - Independent StudyProjects are arranged with individual professors and must be confirmed by the director of Cinema and Media Arts within two weeks of the beginning of classes; otherwise the student will be dropped from the rolls. [Variable credit: 1-3 each semester. Limit of 6 hours for 3850 and 3851 combined for majors.] (No AXLE credit) CMA3880 - Internship Training

Projects are arranged with individual professors and must be confirmed by the director of Cinema and Media Arts within two weeks of the beginning of classes; otherwise the student will be dropped from the rolls. [Variable credit: 1-3 each semester. Limit of 6 hours for 3850 and 3851 combined for majors.] (No AXLE credit) CMA3880 - Internship TrainingUnder faculty supervision, students from any discipline can gain experience working on projects related to film and media in public or private organizations. Responsibilities include conducting background research and developing skills in film and media study and production. Hours for background readings and research will be completed in CMA 3881 concurrently with 3880. Normally a 2.90 grade point average, 6 hours of prior work in Cinema and Media Arts, and approval of the student's plan by the director of undergraduate studies are required. A research paper and report must be submitted at the end of the semester during which the internship training is completed. Offered on a Pass/Fail basis only and must be taken concurrently with 3881. Hours of 3880 will not count toward the Film Studies Major or minor. Corequisite: 3881. [Variable credit: 1-9] (No AXLE

CMA3881 - Internship Readings and ResearchUnder faculty supervision, students from any discipline can gain experience working on projects related to film and media in public or private organizations. Responsibilities include conducting background research and developing skills in film and media study and production. Hours for background readings and research will be completed in CMA 3881 concurrently with CMA 3880. Normally a 2.90 grade point average, 6 hours of prior work in Cinema and Media Arts, and approval of the student's plan by the director of undergraduate studies are required. A research paper and report must be submitted at the end of the semester during which the internship training is completed. Readings and research conducted under the supervision of a member of the Cinema and Media Arts program and a substantial research paper or written project (such as a screenplay, treatment, or production plan related to the Training component) is required. Corequisite: 3880. [Variable credit: 1-6] (No AXLE credit)

CMA3891 - Special Topics in Film and Video ProductionTopics vary. May be repeated more than once if there is no duplication of topic. Prerequisite: 1500. [3] (No AXLE

CMA3892 - Special Topics in the Study of FilmTopics vary. May be repeated more than once if there is no duplication of topic. [3] (HCA)

CMA3893 - Special Topics in National Cinema and MovementsMajor directors, genres, styles of film-making in a specific national context. May be repeated for credit more than once if there is no duplication in topic. [3] (HCA)

CMA4961 - Senior Seminar on Criticism, Theory, and HistoryAdvanced reading and research in film. Offered on a graded basis only. Prerequisite:1600 and senior standing.[3] (No AXLE credit)

CMA4962 - Senior Seminar on Film PracticeAdvanced independent filmmaking, portfolio assembly, and professionalism. Offered on a graded basis only.Prerequisite: 1500 and senior standing. [3] (No AXLE credit)

CMA4998 - Senior Honors ResearchAcquisition, reading, and analysis of primary source research material. Open only to senior honor students. [3]

CMA4999 - Senior Honors ThesisWriting a thesis under the supervision of the thesis advisor. Open only to senior honor students. Prerequisite: 4998. [3] (No AXLE credit)

CE2101 - Civil and Environmental Engineering Information SystemsInformation technologies used by civil and environmental engineers. Lab and project-oriented course focusing on developing skills in engineering drawings, computer graphics, plans reading, leveling, mapping, and GIS.Integration of CAD and surveying with team-based projects. FALL [3]

CE2120 - Sustainable Design in Civil EngineeringConcepts and methods of sustainability; resilience in civil engineering design. Best practices. Economic, social, and environmental analysis. Ratings, indices, and measurements. Local, regional, and federal policy. Challenges posed by climate change. Sustainability and resilience rating systems. Applications to development and design.FALL. [3]

CE2200 - StaticsVector analysis of two- and three-dimensional equilibrium of particles, rigid bodies, trusses, frames, and machines. Internal forces, shear and moment diagrams, cables, centroids, moments of inertia, and friction.Credit offered for only one of CE 2200 or BME 2100. Corequisites: MATH 1301, PHYS 1601. FALL, SPRING, SUMMER [3]

CE2205 - Mechanics of MaterialsStress and strain; tension, compression, and shear; Hooke's law, Mohr's circle, combined stresses, strain-energy.Beams, columns, shafts, and continuous beams. Deflections, shear and moment diagrams. Prerequisite: CE2200. FALL, SPRING, SUMMER. [3]

CE3100W - Civil and Environmental Engineering LaboratoryA team project-oriented course that integrates principles of engineering design, simulation, and experimentation as applied to civil engineering. Emphasis on experimental design, data analysis, and technical communication.Prerequisite: CE 2205. SPRING. [2]

CE3200 - Structural AnalysisClassification; nature of loads and their calculation; analysis of statically determinate and indeterminate beams, trusses, and frames using classical methods (integration, moment area, energy) and matrix methods; basics of nonlinear behavior; structural analysis software. Prerequisite: CE 2205. FALL. [3]

CE3205 - Structural DesignLoads and their identification; issues of safety and uncertainties; steel and concrete behavior and design of components in compression, tension, bending, shear; application to simple structural systems; use of the AISCSteel Specifications; sustainability issues. Prerequisite: CE 3200. SPRING [3]

CE3250 - Geotechnical EngineeringOrigin, formation, identification, and engineering properties of soils. Discussion on index properties, soil moisture, soil structure, compressibility, shear strength, stress analysis, Rankine and Coulomb earth pressure theories and bearing capacity. Laboratory experiences. Graduate credit for earth and environmental sciences majors. Prerequisite: CE 2205. FALL. [3]

CE3300 - Risk, Reliability, and Resilience EngineeringFundamental concepts in probability and statistical inference. Counting methods, discrete and continuous random variables, and their associated distributions. Sampling distributions, point estimation, confidence intervals, and hypothesis testing. Applications of probability and statistics to risk, reliability, and resilience of engineering systems. Prerequisite: MATH 2300. SPRING. [3]

CE3501 - Transportation Systems EngineeringPlanning, design, and operations of transportation systems. Particular emphasis on the design process, traffic engineering, urban transportation planning, the analysis of current transportation issues, and the ethics of transportation safety. SPRING. [3]

CE3600 - Environmental EngineeringParameters affecting environmental quality, including air and water pollutants; treatment techniques to achieve drinking water quality or permit safe discharge to the environment. Sustainability. Contaminant transport and interactions of contaminants with the environment. Risk assessment and governmental regulations covering air, water, solid and hazardous wastes. Residuals management including hazardous and solid waste. Prerequisite: CHEM 1601, PHYS 1601, MATH 2420. FALL. [3]

CE3700 - Fluid MechanicsPhysical properties of fluids, fluid statics; integral and differential equations of conservation of mass, energy, and momentum; principles of real fluid flows: boundary layer effects, flow through pipes, flow in open channels, drag forces on bodies. Emphasis on civil and environmental engineering applications. Credit not awarded for both CE 3700 and ME 3224. Prerequisite: ME 2190, MATH 2420. FALL, SUMMER. [3]

CE3700L - Fluid Mechanics LaboratoryTeam project-oriented course. Practical applications of fluid mechanics principles through laboratory exercises and field trips. Corequisite: CE 3700. FALL. [1]

CE3705 - Water Resources EngineeringEngineering of water resources and sewerage systems that control the quantity, quality, timing, and distribution of water to support human habitation and the needs of the environment. Closed conduit flow, open channel flow, surface hydrology, groundwater hydrology, and contaminant transport. Prerequisite: CE 3700 or CHBE3300 or ME 3224. SPRING. [3]

CE3841 - Directed StudyDirected individual study of a pertinent topic in civil and environmental engineering. May include literature review and analysis, analytical investigations, and/or experimental work. Prerequisite: Junior standing, completion of two CE courses, and one-page proposal approved by supervising faculty member and chair. [1-3

CE3842 - Directed StudyContinuation of CE 3841 in the same or another area of civil and environmental engineering. Prerequisite: CE3841 and one-page proposal approved by supervising faculty member and chair. [1-3 each semester]

CE3843 - Directed StudyContinuation of CE 3842 in the same or another area of civil and environmental engineering. Prerequisite: CE3842 and one-page proposal approved by supervising faculty member and chair. [1-3 each semester]

CE3890 - Special Topics0-3CE4100 - Geographic Information Systems (GIS)Course DescriptionPrinciples of computerized geographic information systems (GIS) and analytical use of spatial information.Integration with global positioning systems (GPS) and internet delivery. Includes GIS software utilization and individual projects. SPRING. [3]

CE4100 - Geographic Information Systems (GIS)Principles of computerized geographic information systems (GIS) and analytical use of spatial information.Integration with global positioning systems (GPS) and internet delivery. Includes GIS software utilization and individual projects. SPRING. [3]

CE4150 - Energy Systems EngineeringPhysical principles of energy conversion. Energy sources and usage. Sustainability and carrying capacity.Systems tools and economics for energy systems. Energy distribution and storage. Future energy system design. Prerequisite: MATH 2300. SPRING. [3]

CE4200 - Advanced Structural Steel DesignAdvanced topics in column and beam design: elastic and inelastic analysis and design of continuous beams, composite beams, torsion design, behavior and design of bolted and welded connections, structural planning and design of structural systems such as multistory buildings. Prerequisite: CE 3205. FALL. [3]

CE4205 - Intelligent Transportation SystemsElements of intelligent transportation system (ITS) architecture. Survey of component systems. Analysis of potential impacts. Field operational tests, analysis methods, deployment initiatives and results. SPRING. [3]

CE4210 - Advanced Reinforced Concrete DesignDesign and behavior of two-way slab systems. Yield line theory. Shear and torsion analysis and design.Serviceability requirements and control of deflections of reinforced concrete systems. Prestressed concrete.Prerequisite: CE 3205. SPRING. [3]

CE4211 - Mechanics of Composite MaterialsReview of constituent materials (reinforcements, matrices, and interfaces) and fabrication processes. Prediction of properties of unidirectional and short fiber materials (micromechanics). Anisotropic elasticity (derivation of Hooke's law for anisotropic materials, macromechanics of laminated composites). Analysis of laminated composites based on Classical Lamination Theory. Behavior of composite beams and plates. Special topics (creep, fracture, fatigue, impact, and environmental effects). Prerequisite: CE 2205, MSE 1500, MSE 1500L.SPRING. [3]

CE4240 - Infrastructure Systems EngineeringSystems-level approach to the infrastructure of the built environment. Elements of systems engineering. Case studies of infrastructure under duress. Smart infrastructure. Transportation, building, and water and wastewater supply and distribution systems. Infrastructure interdependencies and concepts of smart cities. Applications to infrastructure system design. FALL. [3]

CE4250 - Foundation Analysis and DesignStudy of shallow and deep foundation elements and systems for civil engineering structures considering geotechnical, structural, and construction aspects. Corequisite: CE 3205. Prerequisite: CE 3250. SPRING. [3]

CE4300 - Reliability and Risk Case StudiesReview of historical events involving successes and failures in managing system reliability and risk from a wide range of perspectives, including design, production, operations, organizational culture, human factors and exogenous events. Analysis of risk factors leading to event occurrence, as well as event consequences in terms of impacts to public health, safety, security and environmental protection. Evaluation of risk mitigation strategies based on achievable goals, technical and political feasibility, and economic impact. Cases drawn from natural disasters, industrial accidents, and intentional acts. Prerequisite: Junior standing. FALL. [3]

CE4320 - Data Analytics for EngineersProgramming, analysis, and visualization of real data for the purposes of informing decision making in engineering problems. Statistical modeling in a practical and applied perspective; application of data analytics to bridge the gap between data and decisions; fundamentals of design of experiments. Prerequisite: CE 3300 or MATH 2810 or MATH 2820. FALL. [3]

CE4340 - Risk and Decision AnalysisRisk quantification, risk perception, decision-making under uncertainty, risk communication. Model risk and decisions using analytical and simulation approaches. Focus on theory and methodology, applications in engineering, environmental systems, business, and healthcare. Prerequisite: CE 3300 or MATH 2810 or MATH2820. FALL. [3]

CE4400 - Construction Project ManagementTheory and application of the fundamentals of construction project management. The construction process and the roles of professionals in the process. Overview of the construction project from conception through completion. Application of management practices including planning, directing, cost minimizing, resource allocation, and control of all aspects of construction operations and resources. Credit given for only one of ENGM3700, CE 4400, or EECE 4950. Prerequisite: CE 3205. FALL. [3]

CE4401 - Advanced Construction Project ManagementCurrent and critical issues in the construction industry, including best practices developed at the Construction Industry Institute (CII). Guest lecturers include representatives of the CII and visiting industry leaders.Prerequisite: CE 4400. FALL. [3]

CE4405 - Construction EstimatingEstimation of material, labor, and equipment quantities, including costing and pricing of construction projects.Application of estimating practices using real-world examples and project estimating software. Corequisite: CE4400. FALL. [3]

CE4410 - Construction Planning and SchedulingFundamentals of construction planning and scheduling. Application of management practices including: process planning; directing, costing; resource allocation; and controlling all aspects of construction operations and resources, from pre-construction through operation and maintenance. Use of real-world examples and project scheduling software. Prerequisite: CE 4400. SPRING. [3]

CE4415 - Construction Materials and MethodsImplications of design realities, material specifications, code limitations, and regulations on the construction process. Natural and man-made materials, construction techniques, and other issues that impact quality, constructability, and life-cycle assessment. SUMMER. [3]

CE4420 - Construction Law and ContractsReview of case studies involving successes and failures in legal principles and landmark cases relevant to civil engineering and construction. Contracts, torts, agency and professional liability, labor laws, insurance, expert testimony, arbitration, patents and copyrights, sureties, and ethics. Prerequisite: CE 4400. SPRING. [3]

CE4425 - Building Information ModelingGeneration and management of building data during its life cycle. Three-dimensional, real-time, dynamic modeling to increase productivity in building design and construction. Considerations of building geometry, spatial relationships, geographic information, and building components. Corequisite: CE 4400. FALL. [3]

CE4430 - High Performance and Green BuildingsDesign and construction of high performance buildings and related systems in buildings. Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design (LEED) green Building Rating System (TM) building approach to sustainability.Prerequisite: CE 4400. SPRING. [3]

CE4500 - Transportation Systems DesignGeometric analysis of transportation ways with particular emphasis on horizontal and vertical curve alignment and superelevation. Design of highways, interchanges, intersections, and facilities for pedestrians, and air, rail, and public transportation. Prerequisite: CE 3501 or 3601. SPRING. [3]

CE4505 - Urban Transportation PlanningAnalytical methods and the decision-making process. Transportation studies, travel characteristic analysis, and land-use implications are applied to surface transportation systems. Emphasis is on trip generation, trip distribution, modal split, and traffic assignment. Planning processes in non-urban settings are also presented.Prerequisite: CE 3501 or CE 3601. SPRING [3]

CE4510 - Traffic EngineeringAnalysis of the characteristics of traffic, including the driver, vehicle, volumes, capacities, congestion, roadway conditions, complete streets and accidents. Traffic regulations, markings, signing, signalization, and safety programs are also discussed. Prerequisite: CE 3501 or CE 3601. FALL. [3]

CE4950 - Civil Engineering Design IA capstone design course for civil engineering students. Includes project conception, design, economic evaluations, safety, reliability, ethics, social and environmental impact, licensure, and government regulations.Projects may be interdisciplinary, competition-oriented, or traditional civil engineering projects. Prerequisite: CE3205. FALL [1].

CE4951 - Civil Engineering Design IIContinuation of CE 4950. The course involves an oral presentation and the submission of a final design report.Prerequisite: CE 4950. SPRING. [2]

CE4959 - Senior Engineering Design SeminarElements of professional engineering practice. Professionalism, licensing, ethics and ethical issues, intellectual property, contracts, liability, risk, reliability and safety, interdisciplinary teams and team tools, codes, standards, professional organizations, careers, entrepreneurship, human factors, and industrial design. Prerequisite: senior standing. Corequisite: CE 4950. FALL. [1]

CHEB1101 - Beginning Classical Hebrew IAlphabet, basic grammar, and vocabulary. Short readings from the Bible. No credit for students who have earned credit for a more advanced Classical Hebrew language course. Offered on a graded basis only. [3] (No AXLE credit)

CHEB1102 - Beginning Classical Hebrew IITransition to extensive reading of the Bible. No credit for students who have earned credit for a more advanced Classical Hebrew language course. Offered on a graded basis only. Prerequisite: 1101. [3] (INT)

CHEB2200 - Intermediate Classical HebrewReview of grammar and expanding vocabulary. Selected readings in prose and poetry from the Bible. No credit for students who have earned credit for a more advanced Classical Hebrew language course. Prerequisite: 1102.[3] (INT)

CHEB2300 - UgariticOrthography, phonology, morphology, and syntax. Introduction to approaches of comparative Semitics and historical Hebrew grammar. Selected readings from various genres illustrating language and literature of ancient Canaan. Prerequisite: 1102. [3] (INT)

CHEB3010 - Historical Hebrew GrammarLinguistic origins and development within Northwest Semitic subgroup. Phonology, morphology, and lexicon.Theory and method in historical linguistics and comparative Semitics. Selected readings in literary, documentary, and epigraphic texts. Prerequisite: 2200. [3] (HCA)

CHEB3020 - Classical Hebrew PoetryHistory and genres of ancient verse. Selected readings from the Bible, including Job and Psalms. Prerequisite: 2200. [3] (HCA)

CHEB3030 - West Semitic InscriptionsOrthography, phonology, morphology, and syntax. Studying Hebrew, Aramaic, Phoenician, and Moabiteepigraphic texts. Theory and method in historical linguistics and comparative Semitics. Prerequisite: 2200. [3]

CLAS1001 - Commons iSeminarTopics vary. General Elective credit only. [1] (No AXLE credit)

CLAS1010 - Introduction to Mediterranean StudiesHistory and geography of southern Europe, north Africa, and Near East from Iron Age through Middle Ages (ca.1000 BCE-1500 CE). Greeks, Romans, and related peoples. Abrahamic religions. Case studies in complexity and change, community and identity, innovation and prosperity, power and conflict, and environment and cosmos.Cultural transmission and reception. [3] (INT)

CLAS1020 - Introduction to Mediterranean ArchaeologyIron Age through Middle Ages (ca. 1000 BCE-1500 CE). Remains of Greeks, Romans, and related peoples of southern Europe, north Africa, and the Near East. Society, economy, religion, urbanism. Human settlement and natural environment. Classical and Renaissance paradigms. Modern theory of material and visual culture.Techniques of data collection, analysis, and curation [3] (SBS)

CLAS1111 - First-Year Writing SeminarIndependent learning and inquiry in an environment in which students can express knowledge and defend opinions through intensive class discussion, oral presentations, and written expression. May be repeated for credit once if there is no duplication of topic, but students may earn only up to 3 credits in any 1111 course per semester of enrollment. [3; maximum of 6 credits total for all semesters of 1111] (AXLE credit category varies by section)

CLAS1120 - Greek CivilizationA survey of the history and achievements of Greece from its Mycenaean origins to the Roman domination. Topics include literature, art, athletics, Periclean Athens, the conquest of Alexander, and the Hellenistic age. [3] (INT) CLAS1130 - The Greek Myths

A survey of the history and achievements of Greece from its Mycenaean origins to the Roman domination. Topics include literature, art, athletics, Periclean Athens, the conquest of Alexander, and the Hellenistic age. [3] (INT) CLAS1130 - The Greek MythsA study of the nature of the Greek myths, with consideration of the related Near Eastern myths and the early history of myths in Greece. Both the divine and the heroic myths, with some attention to the development of these myths in Italy and to their influence upon art and literature. [3] (HCA)

CLAS1150 - Roman CivilizationAncient Roman civilization from mythical foundations to the fall of the empire. A historical survey of topics including art and architecture, city life, agriculture, religion, law, slavery, public entertainment, and literature.[3] (INT)

CLAS1200W - Classics and Contemporary CultureReception and appropriation of Greco-Roman culture by the Western world and its relationship to contemporary critical issues. Sociopolitical concerns, including racism, colonialism, and political extremism. Offered on a graded basis only. [3] (P)

CLAS2100 - History of the Ancient Near EastFrom the neolithic period to the conquests of Alexander the Great, in the geographical area from Persia to Troy and Egypt. Special attention to the history of Israel. [3] (INT)

CLAS2110 - History of Greece to Alexander the GreatThe Greek world from the beginning of the Mycenaean Age (1650 B.C.) to the end of the Classical period. Special attention to the relationship between political history and the development of Hellenism. [3] (INT)

CLAS2120 - The Greek World from Alexander the Great to the Roman EmpireThe eastern Mediterranean from the rise of Macedon and Alexander the Great to the High Roman Empire. Social, cultural, political, and religious changes. Issues of imperialism and colonialism, and questions of identity in a geographically expansive Greek world. [3] (INT)

CLAS2150 - History of the Roman RepublicThe growth and evolution of the Roman world, from the foundation of the city in the seventh century B.C. to the reign of Caesar Augustus. The Romans' unification of Italy, conquest of the Mediterranean and western Europe, adoption of Hellenism, and overthrow of the Republic. [3] (INT)

CLAS2160 - History of the Roman EmpireThe Roman world from Augustus to the collapse of the western empire in the fifth century. Political, military, social, and religious history. Special attention given to problems arising from use of the primary sources as well as to controversies in modern scholarship. [3] (INT)

CLAS2180 - The Mediterranean World from Late Antiquity to the Middle AgesEastern Roman Empire from Constantine to Arab conquests. Political, social, cultural, and religious history, including monasticism, barbarian invasions, changing roles of Emperor and Church, and birth of Islam.Developments in urban life and landscape. [3] (INT)

CLAS2210 - Late Classical Greek and Hellenistic Art and ArchitectureSculpture, vase painting, architecture, and the minor arts from after the Parthenon to the Roman Empire. Media that developed significantly in this period, such as wall painting and mosaic. [3] (HCA)

CLAS2250 - Roman Art and ArchitectureSculpture, architecture, and painting from the tenth century B.C.E. to the early fourth century C.E. Daily life of the Romans as seen in excavations of the towns of Pompeii and Herculaneum. [3] (HCA)

CLAS2260 - The Art of Pagans, Christians, and JewsReligious art of the Roman Empire in late antiquity. Visual art reflecting religious beliefs and practices. Greco-Roman cults, early Christianity, and Rabbinical Judaism. [3] (HCA)

CLAS2300 - Ancient ScienceMajor traditions of scientific thought and practice in the ancient Mediterranean world: emergence, aims, methods and achievements. Relationship between science and society, ancient and modern. [3] (SBS)

CLAS3000 - Classical Tradition in AmericaInfluences of classical Greece and Rome on the literature, politics, architecture, and values of the United States from the colonial period to the present. [3] (US)

CLAS3010 - The Ancient Origins of Religious Conflict in the Middle EastReligious oppositions in the eastern Mediterranean world from the Maccabean revolt to the Muslim conquests of the seventh century; beginnings of religious militancy; challenges of monotheism to Greco-Roman civilization; conversion, persecution, and concepts of heresy and holy war in Christianity, Judaism, and Islam. [3] (P) CLAS3020 - The Classical World on Film

Religious oppositions in the eastern Mediterranean world from the Maccabean revolt to the Muslim conquests of the seventh century; beginnings of religious militancy; challenges of monotheism to Greco-Roman civilization; conversion, persecution, and concepts of heresy and holy war in Christianity, Judaism, and Islam. [3] (P) CLAS3020 - The Classical World on FilmModern cinematic depictions of the mythology, drama, and history of ancient Greece and Rome, accompanied by readings from ancient sources. The Trojan War, Greek tragedy, and the Roman empire. Emphasis on how antiquity is used to express modern concerns and ideologies. [3] (HCA)

CLAS3030 - Death, Disease, and Health in the Ancient WorldFrom the Bronze Age to early Christianity and Late Antiquity. Biological history of the Greeks, Romans, and other Mediterranean peoples. Changing concepts of death and afterlife; interpretations of disease; medical thought and practice. Healing, epidemics, natural catastrophe, and dietary variation. Evidence from classical literature, archaeology, bones and teeth. [3] (SBS)

CLAS3100 - Women, Sexuality, and the Family in Ancient Greece and RomeThe status and role of women, law and the regulation of the private sphere, sexuality and gender roles, demography and family structure, marriage, children, religion, domestic architecture and the household economy, ancient critiques of the family, and the impact of Christianity. [3] (SBS)

CLAS3110 - Warfare in the Ancient MediterraneanContinuity and change in ancient Greek and Roman warfare 800 B.C. to A.D. 120. Social, political, and religious aspects of war. Effects of war, imperialism, and militarism on internal and external populations. [3] (INT) CLAS3120 - Humor, Ancient to Modern

Continuity and change in ancient Greek and Roman warfare 800 B.C. to A.D. 120. Social, political, and religious aspects of war. Effects of war, imperialism, and militarism on internal and external populations. [3] (INT) CLAS3120 - Humor, Ancient to ModernAncient comic forms juxtaposed with modern theories of humor. Aristophanic Old Comedy, New Comedy, and Satire. Modern parallels. [3] (HCA)

CLAS3150 - Roman LawThe relationship between law and society as illustrated by cases drawn from Roman legal and literary sources.The development of legal reasoning and the rise of an autonomous legal profession at Rome. Delicts (torts), property, contracts, and family law, taught in rotation. May be repeated for credit if in a different area of law.[3]

CLAS3160 - Roman Law and Social HistoryRelationship of law and society as illustrated by legal, literary, epigraphic, and papyrological evidence. Views and methodologies of leading modern scholars. Focus on methodology. Marriage, family, personal status, the economy, and judicial system. Basic familiarity with Roman history or law is expected. Serves as repeat credit for HIST 2238. [3] (SBS)

CLAS3190 - Augustan RomeSocial, administrative, religious, and military reforms. Common themes in art, architecture, and literature; changes in national identity in the transition from Republic to Empire. Serves as repeat credit for students who have earned credit for 3190W. Prerequisite: 1150, 2150, or 2160. [3] (HCA)

CLAS3190W - Augustan RomeSocial, administrative, religious, and mili- tary reforms. Common themes in art, architecture, and literature; changes in national identity in the transition from Republic to Empire. Prerequisite: 1150, 2150, or 2160. [3]

CLAS3200 - The Greek CityThe example of ancient Athens. The stoa, the theatre, the house, and fortifications. Institutions such as the courts, the public assembly, and the family. Literary, historical, archaeological, and philosophical sources. [3]

CLAS3210 - Religions of the Ancient MediterraneanAncient religious practices and beliefs through the evidence of archaeological sites, material remains, and written texts. Cross-cultural comparisons of sanctuaries, rituals, priesthoods, and sacred texts and objects.Consideration of mystery cults, magic, and alternative groups. [3] (INT)

CLAS3220 - The Trojan War in History, Art, and LiteratureRepresentations in Classical Greek art, literature, and archaeological evidence. The composition of the Homeric epics; the meaning of the Trojan War to later audiences. [3] (HCA)

CLAS3230 - Alexander the GreatAlexander's rise to power and conquests in Europe, Asia, and Africa; the legacy of his introduction of Greek culture to the East; his significance to later audiences. Offered on a graded basis only. [3] (HCA)

CLAS3240 - Greek Culture in the Roman WorldLiterature, culture, and politics from the 1st to 4th centuries AD. Developments in rhetoric, elite and popular entertainment, scholarship, and medicine. Relationship of literature to imperial rule. Administration through the prisms of cultural identity, cosmopolitanism, citizenship, religion, and the development of ruling classes. [3]

CLAS3250W - Jews and GreeksFrom the seventh century BCE to ca. 1500 CE. Sites of interaction, languages, cultural ties, religious tensions, political conflicts, and competing philosophies. Works by Elephantine, Alexander the Great, the Maccabees, the Septuagint, Aristeas, Josephus, Philo, the rabbis, the New Testament, Ezekiel the Tragedian, Byzantium. [3] (INT) CLAS3260 - Plato: Knowledge, Reality, and Goodness

From the seventh century BCE to ca. 1500 CE. Sites of interaction, languages, cultural ties, religious tensions, political conflicts, and competing philosophies. Works by Elephantine, Alexander the Great, the Maccabees, the Septuagint, Aristeas, Josephus, Philo, the rabbis, the New Testament, Ezekiel the Tragedian, Byzantium. [3] (INT) CLAS3260 - Plato: Knowledge, Reality, and GoodnessMajor works of one of the most influential thinkers in history. The dialogues: Meno, Phaedo, Republic, and others. Theory of the forms, arguments for immortality, nature of the good. Relevant contemporary thinkers. [3]

CLAS3300 - AkkadianIntroduction to the cuneiform script and to the grammar of Akkadian, the language of ancient Mesopotamia.Selected readings in Old Babylonian (CODEX Hammurabi, Mari letters) and Neo-Assyrian texts (Creation Poem, Gilgamesh Epic). [3] (INT)

CLAS3301 - AkkadianContinuation of 3300. Introduction to the cuneiform script and to the grammar of Akkadian, the language of ancient Mesopotamia. Selected readings in Old Babylonian (CODEX Hammurabi, Mari letters) and Neo-Assyrian texts (Creation Poem, Gilgamesh Epic). [3] (INT)

CLAS3310 - Culture of the Ancient Near EastA survey of highly sophisticated Near East cultures of the last three millennia before the common era (B.C.).Discussion of political histories, and the social, religious, and intellectual heritage of Mesopotamia, Egypt, and Anatolia through excavated artifacts and written documents. [3] (INT)

CLAS3320 - The Amarna AgeThe Amarna period from the sixteenth through the twelfth centuries B.C.E., as illumined by excavations of palaces and temples in Egypt, Anatolia, Canaan, and Mesopotamia as well as the vast historical, legal, and literary documents of the period. Focus on the internationalism and theological speculation of the period as seen through the powerful personalities and accomplishments of leaders such as Thutmoses III, Suppiluliumas, Ramses II, and the spiritually influential Akehnaten. [3] (INT)

CLAS3333 - Pandemics and Society in Historical PerspectiveReligious, racial, political, economic and human (psychological) consequences of global pandemics in the premodern world, from Antiquity to the Black Death (1348). Assess ways contagion transforms societies and its relation to concurrent issues of violence and social justice. [3] (HCA)

CLAS3350 - History of Early and Medieval ChristianityExpansion from second through fifteenth centuries across the Mediterranean into Asia, Africa, and Europe.Believers' practice and doctrine, relationship with Roman Empire, development of the Church, and social and cultural history of believers from after New Testament into late Middle Ages. Global perspective. Roots of Catholicism, Protestantism, and Eastern Christianity. [3] (INT)

CLAS3360 - Early Christian PoetryComposition and reception of verse from Late Antiquity to the Early Middle Ages. Historical, cultural, and geographic contexts of religious poetry and hymnody from the New Testament through the 9th century. Greek and Roman models, Christian literary innovations, and influence on modern writers. Readings in translation from Syriac, Greek, Latin, and Old English. [3] (INT)

CLAS3370 - The History of Syriac ChristianityChristians who spoke the Aramaic dialect during Late Antiquity to modern times from the Near East to the Persian Gulf, India, and China. Culture and literature under the Byzantine Empire and the Islamic States in the Middle East. History and theology of religious communities. Historiographical debates about Syriac origins and development. [3] (INT)

CLAS3380 - Desert Spirituality in Early ChristianityRise of asceticism in Late Antiquity. History and geography of asceticism in Syria and Egypt. Diversification and spread across the Mediterranean region. Selected readings in translation of sayings, hagiography, theology, and verse. Legacy in modern belief. [3] (INT)

CLAS3600 - Seminar in the Digital HumanitiesTheory, method, and applications in history, classics, and religious studies. Focus on historical data and research tools in the study of the Mediterranean world. Integration and manipulation of textual and spatial data.Scholarly interfacing and public access. New media. Developing research plans. [3] (SBS)

CLAS3700 - Uncovering Greek Religion: Cults, Festivals, and Sanctuaries in the Ancient WorldPaganism to Judaism and early Christianity. Material culture, including architecture, sculpture, votive dedications, and topography of sanctuaries. Relationship between religion and culture. Politics, warfare, and athletics. Impact of ancient cults on modern Greece. Taught in Greece. Offered on a graded basis only. [3] (INT) CLAS3710 - Archaeology, History, and Culture in Greece: Kenchreai Field School

Paganism to Judaism and early Christianity. Material culture, including architecture, sculpture, votive dedications, and topography of sanctuaries. Relationship between religion and culture. Politics, warfare, and athletics. Impact of ancient cults on modern Greece. Taught in Greece. Offered on a graded basis only. [3] (INT) CLAS3710 - Archaeology, History, and Culture in Greece: Kenchreai Field SchoolArchaeological field school at the site of Kenchreai with seminars and excursions in southern Greece. Basic techniques in excavation, survey, and the analysis of architecture, artifacts, and bones. Explorations of churches, temples, houses, and tombs. Focus on Greece during the Roman Empire and late antiquity. Landscape settlement, cult practice, cultural and social diversity, and funerary ritual. Offered on a graded basis only. [3]

CLAS3720 - History and Art of Ancient RomeThe mid-second century BCE to the mid-second century CE. Investigating significant sites, monuments, and museum collections in Rome and locations throughout southern Italy. Monumental and domestic architecture, wall paintings, sculpture, coins, and ancient sources. [3] (INT)

CLAS3730 - The Roman to Medieval Near East: Caesarea Excavations, IsraelFrom Herod the Great to the Mamluk conquest. Excavation of the site of Caesarea on the Mediterranean coast.Social, cultural, economic, and religious history. Maritime commerce; Roman rule; and the Christian, Jewish, and Muslim communities. Archaeological methods, geospatial analysis, and processing artifacts. Monumental architecture, urban topography, and littoral environment. Daily field and laboratory work with additional seminars and excursions. [3] (INT)

CLAS3850 - Independent StudyCompletion of a substantial research paper in either classics or the classical tradition under the direction of a faculty sponsor. Consent of both the faculty sponsor and the director of undergraduate studies is required. May be repeated for a total of 6 credits if there is no duplication in topic, but students may earn only up to 3 credits per semester of enrollment. [1-3; maximum of 6 credits for all semesters of CLAS 3850] (No AXLE credit) CLAS3880 - Internship Training

Completion of a substantial research paper in either classics or the classical tradition under the direction of a faculty sponsor. Consent of both the faculty sponsor and the director of undergraduate studies is required. May be repeated for a total of 6 credits if there is no duplication in topic, but students may earn only up to 3 credits per semester of enrollment. [1-3; maximum of 6 credits for all semesters of CLAS 3850] (No AXLE credit) CLAS3880 - Internship TrainingUnder faculty supervision, students can gain experience in a range of Classics-related programs at public or private institutions including museums and/or federal agencies. Skills can be developed in the areas of public speaking and engagement, digital humanities and cultural heritage management. Credit hours earned are based upon actual work performed at the internship site. A minimum of 1 credit hour in background readings and research must be completed in CLAS 3881 concurrently with, and regardless of, the number of hours earned in 3880. A substantial research paper or report must be submitted at the end of the semester during which the internship is completed. These credit hours may NOT count in the minimum required for the CLASmajor or minor. Normally, a 3.0 grade point average, 6 hours of prior work and and prior approval of a specific plan of work by the director of undergraduate studies in Classical and Mediterranean Studies are required.Offered on a Pass/Fail basis only and must be taken concurrently with CLAS 3881. Corequisite: 3881. Variable credit. [1-9] (No AXLE credit)

CLAS3881 - Internship Readings and ResearchUnder faculty supervision, students can gain experience in a range of Classics-related programs, at public or private institutions, including museums and/or federal agencies. Skills can be developed in the areas of public speaking and engagement, digital humanities, and cultural heritage management. Credit hours earned are based upon readings or research supervised by CLAS faculty to lend some intellectual foundation to the internship experience. A minimum of 1 credit hour in background readings and research must be completed in 3881 concurrently with, and regardless of, the number of hours earned in 3880. A substantial research paper or report must be submitted at the end of the semester during which the internship training is completed. These credit hours may count in the minimum required for the CLAS major or minor. Normally, a 3.0 grade point average, 6 hours of prior work and prior approval of a specific plan of work by the director of undergraduate studies in Classical and Mediterranean Studies are required. Offered on a graded basis only and must be taken concurrently with 3880. Co-requisite: 3880. Variable credit: [1-6] (No AXLE credit)

CLAS3890 - Special TopicsMay be repeated for credit more than once if there is no duplication in topic. Students may enroll in more than one section of this course each semester. [3] (INT)

CLAS4998 - Senior Honors ThesisOpen only to seniors in the departmental honors program. [3] (No AXLE credit)

CLAS4999 - Senior Honors ThesisOpen only to seniors in the departmental honors program. [3] (No AXLE credit)

CMST1001 - Commons iSeminarTopics vary. General Elective credit only. [1] (No AXLE credit)

CMST1002 - Introduction to Communication StudiesTheoretical foundations and practice of human communication. Argument and advocacy; public address; and critical analysis of media and culture. [3] (HCA)

CMST1002W - Introduction to Communication StudiesTheoretical foundations and practice of human communication. Argument and advocacy; public address; and critical analysis of media and culture. Serves as repeat credit for students who have completed 1002. [3] (HCA) CMST1111 - First-Year Writing Seminar

Theoretical foundations and practice of human communication. Argument and advocacy; public address; and critical analysis of media and culture. Serves as repeat credit for students who have completed 1002. [3] (HCA) CMST1111 - First-Year Writing SeminarIndependent learning and inquiry in an environment in which students can express knowledge and defend opinions through intensive class discussion, oral presentations, and written expression. May be repeated for credit once if there is no duplication of topic, but students may earn only up to 3 credits in any 1111 course per semester of enrollment. [3; maximum of 6 credits total for all semesters of 1111] (AXLE credit category varies by section)

CMST1500 - Fundamentals of Public SpeakingTheory and practice in speaking before an audience. Problems of preparation, content, organization, language, and delivery are treated. [3] (HCA)

CMST1501 - Public Communication of ScienceTheory and practice of speaking before an audience. Designed around the communication of science to non-specialists. Issues of adaptation, organization, evidence, delivery, and style. [3] (HCA)

CMST1850 - Interpersonal CommunicationA study of both the theory and application of verbal and nonverbal communication as they occur in relatively unstructured person-to-person and small group settings. [3] (SBS)

CMST2100 - Argumentation and DebateA course in the practice of debate examining argumentation theory. Emphasis on forms of reasoning and use of evidence in debate. Prerequisite: 1500. [3] (HCA)

CMST2110 - PersuasionThe theory and practice of persuasion with particular emphasis on speech composition, the use of language and its relationship to oral style, structure, and the relationship of structure to the process of speech preparation.Prerequisite: 1500. [3] (HCA)

CMST2120 - Business CommunicationTheory and practice of communication in relation to businesses and organizations with application to leadership, values and ethics, strategic communication theory, and organizational conflict. Prerequisite: 1500. [3] (HCA) CMST2400 - History of World Cinema

Theory and practice of communication in relation to businesses and organizations with application to leadership, values and ethics, strategic communication theory, and organizational conflict. Prerequisite: 1500. [3] (HCA) CMST2400 - History of World CinemaSurvey of world film history from 1895 to the present. Key films and filmmakers. Historical, aesthetic, national, and political contexts of films and film movements. Prerequisite: CMA 1600. [3] (HCA)

CMST2432 - Soccer: Media, Art, and SocietyRelationship of soccer to political power, globalization, mass media, gender, migration, national identity, and transnational commerce. History of the game and its tactics. Representations of soccer in various artistic media such as literature, film, poetry, and video art. Taught in English. Not open to students who have earned credit for GER 1111.09. [3] (INT)

CMST2750 - Communication, Sports, and SocietyHow sport informs both domestic and international politics, identity, cultures, interpersonal relationships, and nationalism. Case studies in activism, documentaries, film, museums, public discourse, speeches, and sports media. [3] (HCA)

CMST2800 - Rhetoric and Civic LifePublic discourse and the duties and prerogatives of citizenship. Theory, models, and criticism of rhetoric and oratory in their deliberative, forensic, and epideictic settings. [3] (HCA)

CMST2850 - Science, Rhetoric, and Public ControversyHistorical and contemporary case studies of public debates over science. Rhetorical strategies of scientists and public advocates; ethical and social implications. [3] (HCA)

CMST2900 - Values in Modern CommunicationAn examination of values, explicit and implicit, in communication situations in modern American society. The course begins with the discovery and analysis of values and applies this process to technological innovation and rhetorical choice, interpersonal communication, advertising and consumerism, and mass-media persuasion. [3]

CMST2950 - Rhetoric of Mass MediaA study of the nature, effects, reasons for the effects, ethics, regulation, and criticism of contemporary mass media communication. Political causes, news reporting, commercial advertising, and similar sources of rhetoric are included. [3] (HCA)

CMST3000 - Rhetoric of the American Experience, 1640-1865A critical and historical examination of the methods and effects of public debate and other attempts to influence the attitudes, affective response, and behavior of the American people. Attention to the rhetorical features of selected issues and speakers from colonial times through the Civil War. [3] (US)

CMST3001 - Rhetoric of the American Experience, 1865 to 1945Critical and historical examination of the methods and effects of public debate and other attempts to influence the attitudes, affective response, and behavior of the American people. Attention to the rhetorical features of selected issues and speakers from 1865 to 1945. [3] (US)

CMST3002 - Rhetoric of the American Experience, 1945-PresentCritical and historical examination of the methods and effects of public debate and other attempts to influence the attitudes, affective response, and behavior of the American people. Attention to the rhetorical features of selected issues and speakers from 1945 to the present. [3] (US)

CMST3050 - Histories of Public CommunicationMethods and effects of public debate and other attempts to influence the attitudes, affective response, and behavior of speakers and audiences in situated historical contexts. [3] (HCA)

CMST3100 - Rhetoric of Social MovementsThe role of communication in the creation, development, and function of social movements. The analysis of specific rhetorical acts. The study of the arguments, patterns of persuasion, and communication strategies of selected social movements. [3] (US)

CMST3110 - Women, Rhetoric, and Social ChangeHistorical influences on women's social activism and engagement with public culture; rhetorical issues facing women advocates. Rhetorical strategies used by them in the U.S. and around the globe. [3] (US)

CMST3120 - Rhetoric of U.S. ReligionAmerican religious discourse in historical and contemporary contexts. Religious traditions and influential rhetorical texts. Significant religious controversies. [3] (US)

CMST3130 - Rhetoric of TechnoscienceTechnoscience in historical, cultural, and political contexts. Significant scientific and technological texts, both scholarly and popular. How definitions of science and technology change across time and contexts and why this matters. How rhetoric is integral to improving communication about science, technology, and the practices of science and engineering. [3] (HCA)

CMST3140 - Communication and the First AmendmentPrinciples, interpretations, and controversies related to the First Amendment of the United States' Constitution.Emphasis on freedom of religion, freedom of speech, and freedom of the press. [3] (US)

CMST3150 - Law, Media, and SocietyHistorical and contemporary studies of legal controversies and their mediation through print, television, film, and emergent media. Practices and politics of advocates involved in legislation and legal reform. Serves as repeat credit for CMST 3890, Section 01 in Fall 2016. [3] (HCA)

CMST3200 - Social Media and Everyday LifeSocial media as assemblage of forms and communicative practices that create sociality in everyday life. Global and ethnographic perspectives. Not open to students who earned credit for 3890 section 1 in spring 2019. [3]

CMST3250W - Ethics in Science and Technology CommunicationTheories of ethics and social justice. Who communicates about science, including scientists, journalists, public relations professionals, and museum specialists; where they communicate (from journal articles to social media); and their audiences. How ethics may change across these contexts. Unique ethical dimensions such as managing hype, conveying risk, and engaging misinformation. [3] (HCA)

CMST3600 - The Rhetorical TraditionDevelopment of rhetorical concepts from classical Greece to the present. Significant rhetoricians and texts. The impact of context on rhetoric. [3] (HCA)

CMST3620 - Rhetoric, Culture, and CritiqueRhetorical criticism of cultural texts and artifacts, including oratory, mass media, and other forms of public discourse. Fundamentals of effective rhetorical analysis and writing. Repeat credit for students who have completed 3620W. [3] (HCA)

CMST3620W - Rhetoric, Culture, and CritiqueRhetorical criticism of cultural texts and artifacts, including oratory and mass media. Fundamentals of rhetorical analysis and writing. Repeat credit for students who have completed 3620. [3] (HCA)

CMST3700 - Politics and Mass MediaImpact of mass-mediated communication on U.S. electoral politics. Pragmatic and ethical influences on the dissemination of information to voters during campaigns. [3] (HCA)

CMST3710 - Cultural Rhetorics of FilmFilm as rhetorical response to historical and cultural change. Filmic treatment of historical trauma; related genres, such as horror and melodrama. [3] (HCA)

CMST3720 - Communicating GenderDominant modes of communicating gender ideology. Effects on policy, politics, and popular culture. Includes theories of rhetoric, gender, sexuality, race, and social class. [3] (P)

CMST3730 - Communication, Culture, and ConsciousnessThe relationship between the primary means of communication in a culture and its influence on knowledge and subjectivity. Orality, literacy, and print, electronic, and digital communication. [3] (P)

CMST3730W - Communication, Culture, and ConsciousnessRelationship between the primary means of communication in a culture and its influence on knowledge and subjectivity. Orality and literacy. Print, electronic, and digital communication. Repeat credit for students who have earned credit for 3730. [3] (P)

CMST3740 - Rhetoric of Medicine and HealthCultural construction of medicine and health through narratives, metaphors, and bodily practices. Case studies in art, ethics, activism, and public controversy. Serves as repeat credit for CMST 3890, Section 01 in Spring 2016. [3] (P)

CMST3750 - Rhetoric of the BodyCultural construction of the body from a rhetorical perspective. Case studies include the history of disability, theories of pollution and pain, and bodily ethics. Serves as repeat credit for CMST 3890, Section 01 in Fall 2017.[3] (P)

CMST3760 - Queer RhetoricsIntellectual, political, and cultural developments between queer theory and communication studies. Theories of performativity and normativity; representations of LGBTQ movements; evolving understandings of queer communities in communication research. Troubling the very idea of "queer" and considering how identity markers such as race, class, gender, gender identity, and disability refine its conceptual and political possibilities. [3] (P)

CMST3800 - Communication and Media StudioTheory and practice of media making. Core concepts in communication studies. Student-designed projects aimed at influencing public discourse. Prerequisite: 1500. [3] (HCA)

CMST3840 - Directed ReadingsSupervised reading and writing in a selected field of the discipline under the guidance of a faculty supervisor.Consent of both the faculty supervisor and the director of undergraduate studies required. Normally open only to majors in communication studies. May be repeated for a total of 6 credits in 3850 and 3840 combined, but students may earn only up to 3 credits per semester of enrollment. [3; maximum of 6 credits total for all semesters of CMST 3850 and 3840] (No AXLE credit)

CMST3850 - Independent StudyA research project in rhetorical criticism to be arranged with the individual instructor. Designed for students who have taken either 3000 or 3001. May be repeated for a total of 6 credits in 3850 and 3840 combined, but students may earn only up to 3 credits per semester of enrollment. [1-3; maximum of 6 credits total for all semesters of CMST 3850 and 3840] (No AXLE credit)

CMST3890 - Selected Topics in Communication StudiesMay be repeated for credit more than once if there is no duplication in topic. Students may enroll in more than one section of this course each semester. [3] (No AXLE credit)

CMST4940 - Seminars in Selected TopicsTopics of special interest. May be repeated for a total of 6 credits in 4940 and 4941 combined if there is no duplication in topic. Students may enroll in more than one section of this course per semester of enrollment.Prerequisite: 15 hours of Communication Studies. [3; maximum of 6 credits total for all semesters of CMST 4940

CMST4941 - Seminars in Selected TopicsTopics of special interest. May be repeated for a total of 6 credits in 4940 and 4941 combined if there is no duplication in topic. Students may enroll in more than one section of this course per semester of enrollment.Prerequisite: 15 hours of Communication Studies. [3; maximum of 6 credits total for all semesters of CMST 4940

CSET1001 - Commons iSeminarTopics vary. General Elective credit only. [1] (No AXLE credit)

CSET1500 - Communicating ScienceTheory and practice of communicating science to general audiences. Public speaking and communicating in other media. Problems of audience analysis, content, organization, delivery, and language. [3]

CSET2100 - Science Communication Tools and TechniquesTranslating technical research for a general readership. Benefits and limitations of different formats, texts, and media for telling stories about science. [3] (HCA)

CSET2130 - The Trial of Galileo and its BackgroundThe interdependence of cosmological theories and religious teachings from the eighth century BCE to the end of the seventeenth century. Examines scientific works and religious texts, including those of Aristotle, Thomas Aquinas, Copernicus, Luther, Galileo, and Newton. [3] (P)

CSET2200 - Crafting the Science Podcast (The Sounds of Science)How podcasts communicate compelling ideas and stories in science. How scientists and producers reach new audiences. Exploring existing podcasts in the media landscape. Producing original audio stories. Prerequisite: 2100. [3] (HCA)

CSET2300 - The Interview: How to Talk to a HumanThe arts of speaking and listening. The basics of a taped interview. Dynamics between interviewer and interviewee. Topics include conflict mediation, psychotherapy, negotiation, restorative justice, social work, and oral history. Practice with interview techniques. [3] (HCA)

CSET2410 - The London Art-Science Scene: Visual Science Communication for the 21st CenturyMaymester. Study and analysis of visual styles for scientific communication in world-leading London museums.Linking the exhibition experience to online media. Student development of visual scientific communication. [3]

CSET2420W - Art and Science: A Shared PastArt and science as ways of knowing the world. Renaissance to the present with focus on histories of observation and experiment. Alchemy, anatomy, museums, photography, and taxidermy. Organization of knowledge, labor, and creativity. [3] (P)

CSET2430 - The Craft of ComputationOrigins of computers in craft technologies. Weaving, engineering, and programming from 1800 to 1980. Issues of labor, gender, and expertise. Exploration of relationship between making and knowing through hands-on investigation. Readings combined with experimental weaving lab using programmable looms. [3] (P)

CSET2500 - Science for EveryoneSurvey of "great ideas" of science. Impact of science on daily life. Hierarchical approach of scientific concepts from basic building blocks of the universe to matter to chemical reactions to the central dogma of biology and evolution to climate change. Using scientific concepts as citizens and participating in the public discourse that is the fabric of democracy. [3] (MNS)

CSET2550 - Genetic Breakthroughs: The Promise and the ProblemsMajor advancements in genetics and genomics and their impacts. Examination of scientific practices to critique both the scientific literature and the popular coverage of this work. Recognizing how science produces new questions, not definitive answers, and how these questions emerge in the context of the societies that produce them. [3] (MNS)

CSET2850 - Science, Rhetoric, and Public ControversyHistorical and contemporary case studies of public debates over science. Rhetorical strategies of scientists and public advocates; ethical and social implications. [3] (HCA)

CSET3090 - Making Science PolicyInteractions between science, technology, and policy, including regulatory failures, funding controversies, and the public perception of the value of scientific research. American context and comparative perspectives.CSET3100 - Science Policy Bootcamp, from Concept to ConclusionCourse DescriptionInterdisciplinary service learning. Trends that shape science and innovation policy. Active policy-making.Prerequisite: Major or minor in Communication of Science and Technology or Public Policy Studies. Open to other students with permission of instructor. [3] (SBS)

CSET3100 - Science Policy Bootcamp, from Concept to ConclusionInterdisciplinary service learning. Trends that shape science and innovation policy. Active policy-making.Prerequisite: Major or minor in Communication of Science and Technology or Public Policy Studies. Open to other students with permission of instructor. [3] (SBS)

CSET3130 - Rhetoric of TechnoscienceTechnoscience in historical, cultural, and political contexts. Significant scientific and technological texts, both scholarly and popular. How definitions of science and technology change across time and contexts and why this matters. How rhetoric is integral to improving communication about science, technology, and the practices of science and engineering. [3] (HCA)

CSET3200W - Technical WritingIntroduction to technical and professional composition for careers in science, business, and industry.Prerequisite: major or minor in Communication of Science and Technology. Open to other students with permission of instructor. [3] (HCA)

CSET3215W - The Art of BloggingConventions of the rapidly evolving literary form of blogging. Creation and maintenance of a personal blog.Critique of online journalism across many genres, including activism, politics, science, and arts and culture.Interaction with professional bloggers. Serves as repeat credit for students who have completed ENGL3215/3215W. [3] (HCA)

CSET3240W - Pop Science: The Art and Impact of Popular Science WritingMechanics and influence of popular science writing in the 21st century. Students will critique bestselling books and award-winning journalism; develop and publish their own blogs with a focus on science, technology, and the environment; and interact with top science writers, editors, and podcasters. Not open to students who have earned credit for 3890 section 01 offered fall 2019. [3] (SBS)

CSET3241W - Ethical Questions in Communication at First ContactEthical questions in science fiction literature about interactions between humankind and extraterrestrial sentient entities. Consequences of ineffective communication. Potential influence of these questions and novels on modern society. [3] (MNS)

CSET3250W - Ethics in Science and Technology CommunicationTheories of ethics and social justice. Who communicates about science, including scientists, journalists, public relations professionals, and museum specialists; where they communicate (from journal articles to social media); and their audiences. How ethics may change across these contexts. Unique ethical dimensions such as managing hype, conveying risk, and engaging misinformation. [3] (HCA)

CSET3257 - Virtual Reality DesignInterdisciplinary, project-based introduction to Virtual Reality (VR). Creation of immersive environments. Student projects guided by faculty mentors to create real-world, consequential VR simulations relevant to, and innovative in, their respective fields. Note: This class is not open to students with a Computer Science major or minor, CS students should enroll in CS 4249. Serves as repeat credit for students who have completed UNIV3279. [3] (MNS)

CSET3261 - Immigrant ScientistsImpact of immigrant scientists on scientific and technological developments in the United States. Professional, political, religious, and economic aspects of immigration and immigrant scientists. Strategies to increase the positive impact of immigrant scientists in today's globalized, competitive, and complex world. [3] (US) CSET3281W - Scientists and the State

Impact of immigrant scientists on scientific and technological developments in the United States. Professional, political, religious, and economic aspects of immigration and immigrant scientists. Strategies to increase the positive impact of immigrant scientists in today's globalized, competitive, and complex world. [3] (US) CSET3281W - Scientists and the StateEthical questions faced by scientists when working for the state. The role of the scientist as obedient bureaucrat or defender of moral principles. The scientist as traitor or hero. [3] (P)

CSET3300 - Science FilmmakingShort-form science filmmaking. Video production and other online science media. Research-based bestpractices. Corequisite: CSET 2100. [3] (HCA)

CSET3310 - Geological Filmmaking: Exploring Deep Time through CinemaExploring geology through the cinematic lens across formal, material, and temporal dimensions. Collaboration and discovery of new ways of seeing the world and understanding our place in it. Course requires travel to investigation sites. Prerequisite or corequisite: EES 1510/1510L. [3] (HCA)

CSET3320W - Environmental Journalism: Investigating Climate ChangeScience, solutions, stakeholders, players, politics, history, and local impacts of climate change. Students pursue their own local reporting, investigating the effects of climate change and the emerging green economy in Nashville. Not open to students who have earned credit for 3890 section 01 offered spring 2020 or ENGL 3896section 01 offered spring 2020 or ENGL 3896 section 01 offered spring 2019. [3] (SBS)

CSET3333 - Special OfferingsTopics vary. May be repeated for credit if there is no duplication in topic. [3]

CSET3410 - Telling Stories with DataPublic understanding of complex issues in the age of big-data. Data analysis using Tableau. Narratives created as personal stories, posters, games, maps, sculptures, and sound from large data sets. Emotive, aesthetic, and practical effects of different presentation methods; metrics for assessing impact. Studio approach with case studies, and hands-on work with tools and technologies. Serves as repeat credit for CSET 3890, section 01 in Fall 2020. [3] (SBS)

CSET3840 - Directed StudyIndividual research and scholarly investigation in science, engineering, or medicine. Usually conducted in a laboratory setting. May be repeated for credit more than once, but students may earn only up to 3 credits per semester of enrollment. [1-3] (No AXLE credit)

CSET3841 - Project in Science Writing and CommunicatingPresentation of scientific, engineering, or medical research, including biographical and historical background where appropriate, in one or more presentation styles (written, visual, web), under faculty supervision. May be repeated for credit more than once, but students may earn only up to 3 credits per semester of enrollment.Prerequisite: 3840 and approval of the program director. [1-3] (No AXLE credit)

CSET3880 - Internship TrainingUnder faculty supervision, students from any discipline can gain experience in a broad range of public and private agencies, institutions, and programs in projects related to the effective communication of scientific or technical knowledge or information. Corequisite: 3881. [1-9] (No AXLE credit)

CSET3881 - Internship Readings & ResearchUnder faculty supervision, students from any discipline can gain experience with agencies, institutions, and programs in projects related to the effective communication of scientific or technical knowledge or information.[1-6] (No AXLE credit)

CSET3890 - Special TopicsTopics as announced. May be repeated for credit more than once if there is no duplication in topic, but students may earn only 3 credits per semester of enrollment. [1-3] (No AXLE credit)

CSET3891 - Special Topics in Writing SkillsAdvanced instruction in telling scientific stories through writing. Topics vary. Counts toward the Telling Scientific Stories: Writing Skills requirement. May be repeated for credit if there is no duplication in topic. [1-3] (May count for Axle: HCA only when offered for 3 credit hours)

CSET3892 - Special topics in Science and NarrativeAdvanced instruction in telling scientific stories using tools and techniques other than traditional writing. Counts toward the Telling Scientific Stories: Science and Narrative requirement. Topics vary. May be repeated for credit if there is no duplication in topic. [1-3] (May count for Axle: HCA when offered for 3 credit hours) CSET3893 - Special topics in Bridging the Sciences and Humanities

Advanced instruction in telling scientific stories using tools and techniques other than traditional writing. Counts toward the Telling Scientific Stories: Science and Narrative requirement. Topics vary. May be repeated for credit if there is no duplication in topic. [1-3] (May count for Axle: HCA when offered for 3 credit hours) CSET3893 - Special topics in Bridging the Sciences and HumanitiesAdvanced instruction in topics that bridge the sciences and the humanities. Counts toward the Bridging the Sciences and Humanities requirement. Topics vary. May be repeated for credit if there is no duplication in topic.[1-3] (May count for Axle: P when offered for 3 credit hours)

CSET4998 - Honors ThesisLimited to students admitted to the Communication of Science and Technology Honors program. May berepeated for credit once, but students may earn only up to 3 credits per semester of enrollment. Prerequisite: 3840 and 3841. [1-3] (No AXLE credit)

CSET6200 - Crafting the Science Podcast (The Sounds of Science)How podcasts communicate compelling ideas and stories in science. How scientists and producers reach new audiences. Exploring existing podcasts in the media landscape. Producing original audio stories. [3]

CS1000 - The Beauty and Joy of ComputingFundamental concepts of computing including abstraction, algorithms, design, and distributed computation.Hands-on curriculum focusing on translating ideas into working computer programs and developing a mastery of practical computational literacy. The relevance and societal impact of computer science are emphasized.Students in the School of Engineering may only receive open elective credit for CS 1000. FALL, SPRING. [3]

CS1100 - Applied Programming and Problem Solving with PythonFoundations of computing using Python. Programming fundamentals. Designing, debugging, running programs.Scalar, vector, and matrix computations for scientific computing and data science. Numeric and text processing.Basic data visualization techniques. Intended for students other than computer science and computerengineering majors. Not open to students who have earned credit for CS 1104. FALL, SPRING. [3]

CS1101 - Programming and Problem SolvingAn intensive introduction to algorithm development and problem solving on the computer. Structured problem definition, top down and modular algorithm design. Running, debugging, and testing programs. Program documentation. Not open to students who have earned credit for CS 1104 without permission. Total credit for this course and CS 1104 will not exceed 3 credit hours. Credit hours reduced from second course taken (or from test or transfer credit) as appropriate. FALL, SPRING. [3]

CS1103 - Introductory Programming for Engineers and ScientistsProblem solving on the computer. Intended for students other than computer science and computer engineering majors. Methods for designing programs to solve engineering and science problems using MATLAB. Generic programming concepts. FALL, SPRING. [3]

CS1104 - Programming and Problem Solving with PythonAn intensive introduction to algorithm development and problem solving using the Python programminglanguage. Structured problem definition, top down and modular algorithm design. Running, debugging, and testing programs. Program documentation. Not open to students who have earned credit for CS 1100, DS 1100, or CS 1101 without permission. Total credit for this course and CS 1100 will not exceed 4 credit hours. Total credit for this course and DS 1100 will not exceed 4 credit hours. Total credit for this course and CS 1101 will not exceed 3 credit hours. Credit hours reduced from second course taken (or from test or transfer credit) as appropriate. FALL, SPRING. [3]

CS1151 - Computers and EthicsAnalysis and discussion of problems created for society by computers, and how these problems pose ethical dilemmas to both computer professionals and computer users. Topics include: computer crime, viruses, software theft, ethical implications of life-critical systems. FALL, SPRING. [3]

CS2201 - Program Design and Data StructuresContinuation of CS 1101/1104. The study of elementary data structures, their associated algorithms and their application in problems; rigorous development of programming techniques and style; design andimplementation of programs with multiple modules, using good data structures and good programming style.Prerequisite: CS 1101 or 1104. FALL, SPRING. [3]

CS2204 - Program Design and Data Structures for Scientific ComputingData structures and their associated algorithms in application to computational problems in science and engineering using Python. Time and memory complexity; dynamic memory structures; sorting and searching; advanced programming and program-solving strategies; efficient software library use. Prerequisite: CS 1100 or DS 1100. FALL, SPRING. [3]

CS2212 - Discrete StructuresSurvey of the mathematical tools necessary for an understanding of computer science. Sets, relations, functions, basic counting techniques, permutations, combinations, graphs, recurrence relations, simple analysis of algorithms, O-notation, Boolean algebra, propositional calculus, and numeric representation. Prerequisite: A course in computer science or two semesters of calculus. FALL, SPRING. [3]

CS2218 - Microcontrollers(Also listed as ECE 2218). Microprocessor and microcontroller architecture with emphasis on controlapplications. Usage of assembly language and interfacing with programs written in high-level languages.Interfacing and real-time I/O with microprocessors, control algorithms, and networking with microcontrollers.Serves as repeat credit for ECE 2218. Prerequisite: ECE 2116 or 2123; one of CS 1101, 1103, or 1104.Corequisite: CS 2218L. SPRING. [3].

CS2218L - Microcontrollers Laboratory(Also listed as ECE 2218L). Laboratory for CS 2218. A small structured project is required. One three-hour laboratory per week. Serves as repeat credit for ECE 2218L. Corequisite: CS 2218. SPRING. [1]

CS2231 - Computer OrganizationThe entire hierarchical structure of computer architecture, beginning at the lowest level with a simple machine model (e.g., a simple von Neumann machine). Processors, process handling, IO handling, and assembler concepts. Graduate credit not given for computer science majors. Prerequisite: CS 2201. Corequisite: EECE2116, EECE 2116L. FALL, SPRING. [3]

CS2281 - Computer Architecture(Also listed as ECE 2281). Introduction to computer architecture from a programmer’s perspective.Fundamentals: Boolean logic, combinational and sequential logic circuits, information representation in binary form. The von Neumann instruction set architecture, programmer’s model of a processor. Low-levelprogramming using the C language, and its mapping to machine instructions. Memory hierarchy andperformance issues. Input/output methods and advanced processors: multi-core, GPUs. CS 2281 is not open for students who have earned credit for ECE 2281 without permission. Serves as repeat credit for ECE 2281.Prerequisite: CS 2201. Corequisite: CS 2281L. FALL, SPRING [3].

CS2281L - Computer Architecture Laboratory(Also listed as ECE 2281L). Laboratory for CS 2281. One three-hour laboratory per week. CS 2281L is not open for students who have earned credit for ECE 2281L without permission. Serves as repeat credit for ECE 2281L.Corequisite: CS 2281. FALL, SPRING [1]

CS2860 - Introduction to Undergraduate ResearchIntroduction to undergraduate research under the direction of Computer Science faculty. Students may take a maximum of 3 credit hours towards the degree. Not open to students who have earned credit for CS 3860, 3861, or 3251 without permission. Prerequisite: CS 1100 or CS 1101. [1-3 each semester]

CS3250 - AlgorithmsAdvanced data structures, systematic study and analysis of important algorithms for searching; sorting; string processing; mathematical, geometrical, and graph algorithms, classes of P and NP, NP-complete and intractable problems. Prerequisite: CS 2201, CS 2212. FALL, SPRING. [3]

CS3251 - Intermediate Software DesignHigh quality development and reuse of architectural patterns, design patterns, and software components.Theoretical and practical aspects of developing, documenting, testing, and applying reusable class libraries and object-oriented frameworks using object-oriented and component-based programming languages and tools.Prerequisite: CS 2201. FALL, SPRING [3]

CS3252 - Theory of Automata, Formal Languages, and ComputationFinite-state machines and regular expressions. Context-free grammars and languages. Pushdown automata.Turing machines. Undecideability. The Chomsky hierarchy. Computational complexity. Prerequisite: CS 2212.SPRING. [3]

CS3253 - Parallel Functional ProgrammingConceptual and practical aspects of designing, implementing, and debugging parallel software programs using functional programming language features and frameworks. Systematic reuse of scalable and robust software patterns and architectures for parallel programs. Prerequisite: CS 1101, CS 3251. FALL. [3]

CS3254 - Concurrent Object-Oriented ProgrammingConceptual and practical aspects of designing, implementing, and debugging concurrent software programs using object-oriented programming language features and frameworks. Systematic reuse of scalable and robust software patterns and architectures for concurrent programs. Prerequisite: CS 1101, CS 3251. SPRING. [3]

CS3258 - Introduction to Computer Graphics2D rendering and image-based techniques, 2D and 3D transformations, modeling, 3D rendering, graphics pipeline, ray-tracing, and texture-mapping. Prerequisite: MATH 2400, 2410, 2501 or 2600; CS 3251. SPRING. [3]

CS3259 - Computer AnimationPrinciples and techniques of computer animation. Topics include storyboarding, camera control, skeletons, inverse kinematics, splines, keyframing, motion capture, dynamic simulation, particle systems, facial animation, and motion perception. Students work in groups on the design, modeling, animation, and rendering of a computer animation project. Prerequisite: MATH 2400, 2410, 2501, or 2600; CS 2201. FALL. [3]

CS3262 - Applied Machine LearningFundamentals of machine learning with emphasis on practical applications to data science problems.Supervised learning (linear and logistic regression, decision trees, support vector machines, neural networks, and deep learning), unsupervised learning (feature selection, data clustering, dimensionality reduction); ethical principles and social implications of machine learning. Does not count as CS Depth elective towards the Computer Science major or minor. Prerequisite: One of CS 1100, 2201, or 2204; one of BME 3200, BSCI 3270, CE3300, DS 2100, ECON 1500 or 1510, MATH 2810 or 2820 or 2821, PSY 2100, PSY-PC 2110, or SOC 2100. FALL, SPRING. [3]

CS3265 - Database Management SystemsLogical and physical organization of databases. Data models and query languages, with emphasis on the relational model and its semantics. Data independence, security, integrity, concurrency. Prerequisite: CS 2201.[3]

CS3270 - Programming LanguagesGeneral criteria for design, implementation, and evaluation of programming languages. Historical perspective.Syntactic and semantic specification, compilations, and interpretation processes. Comparative studies of data types and data control, procedures and parameters, sequence control, nesting, scope and storage management, run-time representations. Problem solving using non-standard languages. Prerequisite: CS 2201; CS 2231 or EECE 2123. FALL, SPRING. [3]

CS3274 - Modeling and SimulationGeneral theory of modeling and simulation of a variety of systems: physical processes, computer systems, biological systems, and manufacturing processes. Principles of discrete-event, continuous, and hybrid system modeling, simulation algorithms for the different modeling paradigms, methodologies for constructing models of a number of realistic systems, and analysis of system behavior. Computational issues in modeling and analysis of systems. Stochastic simulations. Prerequisite: CS 2201. [3]

CS3276 - Compiler ConstructionReview of programming language structures, translation, loading, execution, and storage allocation.Compilation of simple expressions and statements. Organization of a compiler including compile-time and run-time symbol tables, lexical scan, syntax scan, object code generation, error diagnostics, object code optimization techniques, and overall design. Use of a high-level language to write a complete compiler.Prerequisite: CS 3270. [3]

CS3281 - Principles of Operating Systems IResource allocation and control functions of operating systems. Scheduling of processes and processors.Concurrent processes and primitives for their synchronization. Use of parallel processes in designing operating system subsystems. Methods of implementing parallel processes on conventional computers. Virtual memory, paging, protection of shared and non-shared information. Structures of data files in secondary storage. Security issues. Case studies. Prerequisite: CS 2231 or EECE 2123, CS 3251. FALL, SPRING. [3]

CS3282 - Principles of Operating Systems IIProjects involving modification of a current operating system. Lectures on memory management policies, including virtual memory. Protection and sharing of information, including general models for implementation of various degrees of sharing. Resource allocation in general, including deadlock detection and prevention strategies. Operating system performance measurement, for both efficiency and logical correctness. Two hours lecture and one hour laboratory. Prerequisite: CS 3281. [3]

CS3860 - Undergraduate ResearchOpen to qualified majors with consent of instructor and adviser. No more than 6 hours of CS 3860 and/or 3861may be counted towards the computer science major. Prerequisite: CS 3251. [1-3 each semester]

CS3861 - Undergraduate ResearchOpen to qualified majors with consent of instructor and adviser. No more than 6 hours of CS 3860 and/or CS3861 may be counted towards the computer science major. Prerequisite: CS 3251. [1-3 each semester]

CS3891 - Special Topics[Variable credit: 1-3 each semester]

CS3892 - Special TopicsFulfills project course requirement in CS major. [3]

CS4239 - Cyber-Physical Systems: Foundations and Project(Also listed as ECE 4239). Foundations of cyber-physical systems and the Internet-of-Things. Model-based engineering of cyber-physical systems, including modeling of physical and computational systems, design and implementation techniques, analysis and verification. Includes modeling and analysis assignments, and project using a simulator and a real-time computer system. Serves as repeat credit for ECE 4239. Prerequisite: CS 3281or ECE 4375 or CS 4375; MATH 2300 or 2500; MATH 2410 or 2501 or 2600. SPRING. [3]

CS4247 - Data VisualizationVisualization analysis and design. Perception, color and multiple-view design, interaction, and task analysis for visualization. Techniques for visualizing geographic data, networks, hierarchical and high-dimensional data, and uncertainty. Prerequisites: CS 3250, 3251; MATH 2410 or 2501 or 2600; MATH 2810 or 2820. [3]

CS4249 - Projects in Virtual Reality DesignStudents work in groups on specification, design, and construction of complex immersive 3D virtualenvironments. Includes modeling, interaction, usability, rendering, perception, and tracking. Prerequisite: CS3251. FALL. [3].

CS4260 - Artificial IntelligencePrinciples and programming techniques of artificial intelligence. Strategies for searching, representation of knowledge and automatic deduction, learning, and adaptive systems. Survey of applications. Prerequisite: CS3250, CS 3251; MATH 2810 or 2820 or 3640. FALL. [3]

CS4262 - Foundations of Machine LearningTheoretical and algorithmic foundations of supervised learning, unsupervised learning, and reinforcement learning. Linear and nonlinear regression, kernel methods, support vector machines, neural networks and deep learning methods, instance-based methods, ensemble classifiers, clustering and dimensionality reduction, value and policy iteration. Explainable AI, ethics, and data privacy. Prerequisite: CS 3251; one of MATH 2810, 2820, or 3640; one of MATH 2410, 2500, 2501, or 2600. SPRING. [3]

CS4266 - Topics in Big DataPrinciples and practices of big data processing and analytics. Data storage databases and data modeling techniques, data processing and querying, data analytics and applications of machine learning using these systems. Prerequisite: CS 3251. SPRING. [3]

CS4267 - Deep LearningModels, algorithms, mathematical tools, and machine learning concepts used in deep learning. Modern practical deep feedforward, convolutional, and recurrent networks. Regularization for deep learning and optimization.Practical design methods. Prerequisite: CS 3250, CS 3251; MATH 2410 or 2600; MATH 2810 or 2820. SPRING. [3]

CS4269 - Project in Artificial IntelligenceStudents work in small groups on the specification, design, implementation, and testing of a sizeable AI software project. Projects (e.g., an "intelligent" game player) require that students address a variety of AI subject areas, notably heuristic search, uncertain reasoning, planning, knowledge representation, and learning. Class discussion highlights student progress, elaborates topics under investigation, and identifies other relevant topics (e.g., vision) that the project does not explore in depth. Prerequisite: CS 4260. SPRING. [3]

CS4275 - Error Analysis in Safety Critical SystemsCase study-based course examining errors in safety critical systems, including healthcare and aviation. Errors explored from multiple perspectives, specifically computer science and systems engineering. Prerequisite: CS3251. SPRING. [3]

CS4277 - Cyber SecuritySoftware issues, secure software design, attacks and detection, identity, sessions, human security mistakes, and security auditing. Prerequisite: CS 3251. FALL. [3]

CS4278 - Principles of Software EngineeringThe nature of software. The object-oriented paradigm. Software life-cycle models. Requirements, specification, design, implementation, documentation, and testing of software. Object-oriented analysis and design. Software maintenance. Prerequisite: CS 3251. FALL. [3]

CS4279 - Software Engineering ProjectStudents work in teams to specify, design, implement, document, and test a nontrivial software project. The use of CASE (Computer Assisted Software Engineering) tools is stressed. Prerequisite: CS 4278. SPRING. [3]

CS4284 - Computer Systems AnalysisTechniques for evaluating computer system performance with emphasis upon application. Topics include measurement and instrumentation techniques, benchmarking, simulation techniques, elementary queuingmodels, data analysis, operation analysis, performance criteria, case studies. Project involving a real computer system. Prerequisite: CS 3281. [3]

CS4285 - Network SecurityPrinciples and practice of network security. Security threats and mechanisms. Cryptography, key management, and message authentication. System security practices and recent research topics. Prerequisite: CS 4283. [3]

CS4286 - Reverse Engineering for CybersecurityCybersecurity from a practical standpoint. Topics include x86 assembly and reverse engineering, vulnerability analysis, and binary exploitation. Types of security defenses used by modern systems. Malware analysis and Windows-based exploits. Prerequisite: CS 3281. SPRING. [3]

CS4287 - Principles of Cloud ComputingFundamental concepts of cloud computing, different service models, techniques for resource virtualization, programming models, management, mobile cloud computing, recent advances, and hands-on experimentation.Prereq: CS 3281. [3]

CS4288 - Web-based System ArchitectureCore concepts necessary to architect, build, test, and deploy complex web-based systems; analysis of key domain requirements in security, robustness, performance, and scalability. Prerequisite: CS 3251. FALL. [3]

CS4289 - Project in Web-Based Software ArchitectureProject-based course building on core concepts necessary to architect, build, test, and deploy complex web-based systems. Students form teams, propose project ideas, architect their solutions, and build the initial minimum viable project for their application. In-class discussions focus on advanced topics in web-development.Prerequisite: CS 4288. SPRING. [3]

CS4352 - Social Network AnalysisExplores recent research on the analysis of social networks and on models and algorithms to abstract their properties and make predictions. Random graph models, network centrality measurements, computational methods of link prediction/recommender systems, clustering and classification on graphs, and network diffusion.Deep learning on graphs including network embedding and graph neural network models and applications.Prerequisites: CS 3250, CS 3251. [3]

CS4375 - Embedded Systems(Also listed as ECE 4375). Design and implementation of embedded computer-based systems. Programming for real-time systems and the Internet of Things. Embedded system modeling, design, analysis, and implementation using real-time and event-driven techniques. A structured project is required. Serves as repeat credit for ECE4375. Prerequisite: ECE 2218, CS 2201. Corequisite: CS 4375L. FALL. [3]

CS4375L - Embedded Systems Laboratory(Also listed as ECE 4375L). Design and implementation of embedded computer-based systems. Programming for real-time systems and the Internet of Things. Embedded system modeling, design, analysis, and implementation using real-time and event-driven techniques. A structured project is required. Serves as repeat credit for ECE4375L. Prerequisite: ECE 2218, CS 2201. Corequisite: CS 4375. FALL. [1]

CS4376 - Foundations of Human Computer InteractionSkills and concepts of Human-Computer Interaction (HCI) to enable the design of systems that effectively meet human needs. Social, cognitive, behavioral and contextual aspects of information systems. Informational dimensions of the human-computer interface, and other user-centered design concepts. Includes conceptual problems in HCI and design approaches to interactive prototype construction and evaluation techniques.Prerequisite: CS 3250 or 3251. FALL. [3]

CS4383 - Computer Networks(Also listed as ECE 4383). Computer communications. Network (Internet) architecture. Algorithms and protocol design at each layer of the network stack. Cross-layer interactions and performance analysis. Network simulation tools. Lab and programming assignments. Serves as repeat credit for ECE 4383. Course not open to students who have earned credit for ECE 4371 without permission. Prerequisite: CS 3281 or ECE 4375. [3]

CS4959 - Computer Science SeminarElements of professional engineering practice, professional education and lifelong learning, intellectual property and software patents, open source and crowd source software development, liability, soft risk safety and security, privacy issues, interdisciplinary teams and team tools, professional organization, careers, entrepreneurship, human computer interaction. Prerequisite: CS 3251. FALL [1]

MCON3000 - ConductingAn introductory course of study stressing the fundamentals of movement and gesture as they relate to style, articulation, phrasing, tempo, cueing, etc. Score reading at the piano. Prerequisite: MUSC 2200 or MUTH 2220, MUKH 1134 or 2134, and MUTH 2400. FALL, SPRING. [2]

MCON3010 - Instrumental ConductingExpansion of basic skills to include longer and more complex musical structures; expanded ability in analysis, memorization, and interpretation; significant independent preparation. Prerequisite: MCON 3000 and consent of instructor. [2] SPRING. Fountain.

MCON3020 - Choral ConductingChoral conducting and rehearsal techniques, score reading and analysis, methods, and materials of choral music. Prerequisite: MCON 3000 and consent of instructor. SPRING. [2] Biddlecombe. (Offered alternate years.) MCON3030 - Advanced Conducting Studies

Choral conducting and rehearsal techniques, score reading and analysis, methods, and materials of choral music. Prerequisite: MCON 3000 and consent of instructor. SPRING. [2] Biddlecombe. (Offered alternate years.) MCON3030 - Advanced Conducting StudiesScore preparation, ensemble techniques, rehearsal strategies. Core repertoire. Physical awareness. Ensemble conducting opportunity. Prerequisite: MCON 3010 or 3020. [2]

MCON3040 - Score Reading IIntroduction to score reading at the keyboard in preparation for advanced study in conducting. Development of sight-reading and choral rehearsal skills; two- to four-part score reading. Permission of instructor required. [1]

MCON3041 - Score Reading IIBuilds on skills learned in Score Reading I. Reading two- to four-parts at the keyboard in all clefs in preparation for advanced score-reading. Continued development of eye-hand coordination and sight-reading skills.Systematic introduction of transposing orchestral instruments. Prerequisite: MCON 3040 and permission of instructor. [1]

MCON3042 - Score Reading IIIIntroduction to full orchestral score reading drawn primarily from early-mid Classical repertoire. Development of reading within instrument families and playing full scores with increasing complexity. Prerequisite: MCON 3041and permission of instructor. [1]

MCON3043 - Score Reading IVContinuation of the skills learned in MCON 3042 to include reading full orchestral scores from the Romantic-21st Century repertoire. Study of common graduate conducting entrance audition repertoire with emphasis on fluency of playing on the keyboard while following a conductor. Prerequisite: MCON 3042 and permission of instructor. [1]

MCON3050 - Directed Study in Conducting IDevelopment and execution of a program of study in conducting under the direction of a member of the department. Must be with a mentor other than the student's professor for MCON 3030. Prerequisite: MCON3041; MUSC 3106; and departmental consent for senior year of the Conducting Concentration. [1]

MCON3051 - Directed Study in Conducting IIContinued development and execution of a program of study in conducting under the direction of a member of the department. Prerequisite: MCON 3050 and departmental consent. [1]

DS1000 - Data Science: How Data Shape Our WorldAccessible, engaging, applied introduction to data science for students from all colleges and majors. Data summary and data visualization; causality and correlation; sampling, resampling, and uncertainty; prediction with linear regression; classification, clustering, and machine learning; ethics. Topics introduced with real-world datasets using a statistical programming language for hands on experience in data science. Enrollment limited to freshmen, sophomores, and juniors. [3]

DS1100 - Applied Programming and Problem Solving with PythonFoundations of computing using Python. Programming fundamentals. Designing, debugging, running programs.Scalar, vector, and matrix computations for scientific computing and data science. Numeric and text processing.Basic data visualization techniques. Intended for students other than computer science and computerengineering majors. Not open to students who have earned credit for CS 1104 or CS 2204 without permission.Total credit for this CS/DS 1100 and CS 1104 will not exceed 4 credit hours. Total credit for CS/DS 1100 and CS2204 will not exceed 5 hours. Credit hours reduced from second course taken (or from test or transfer credit) as appropriate. [3]

DS2100 - Statistics for Data ScienceIntroduction to descriptive and inferential statistics using computational and resampling approaches from data science. Probability, measurement, random variables, distributions, central tendency, variability, confidence intervals, measures of uncertainty, estimation, prediction, hypothesis testing and inference, replicability, power, effect size, t-tests, correlation, univariate ANOVA, and simple linear regression. Examples from wide range of disciplines. [3]

DS3100 - Fundamentals of Data ScienceObtaining, manipulating, processing, cleaning, wrangling, visualizing, and analyzing data; effectively communicating results from data analyses. Imputation, multiple linear and logistic regression, regularization, dimensionality reduction, maximum likelihood, model selection, general linear model. Ethics, privacy, and security in data science. Statistical computing for data science in R. Prerequisites: One of: CS 1100, 1101, or 1104. One of: DS 2100, BME 2400, BSCI 3270, CE 3300, ECON 1500, ECON 1510, MATH 2810, MATH 2821, PSY2100, PSY-PC 2110, or SOC 2100. [4]

DS3262 - Applied Machine LearningFundamentals of machine learning with emphasis on practical applications to data science problems.Supervised learning (linear and logistic regression, decision trees, support vector machines, neural networks, and deep learning), unsupervised learning (feature selection, data clustering, dimensionality reduction); ethical principles and social implications of machine learning. Intended for students other than computer science majors. Prerequisites: One of CS 1100, CS 2201, or CS 2204; one of DS 2100, BME 2400, BSCI 3270, CE 3300, ECON 1500 or 1510, MATH 2810 or 2820 or 2821, PSY 2100, PSY-PC 2110, SOC 2100. [3]

DS3850 - Independent Study in Data ScienceDevelopment of research project by individual student under direction of a faculty sponsor. Project must involve (1) development, evolution, or implementation of data science methods, (2) application of data science to one or more fields in the physical, life, or social sciences, engineering, arts, or humanities, or (3) study impact of data on society and its institutions. Consent of both the faculty sponsor and Director of the DS minor required.[1-4]

DS3851 - Independent Study in Data ScienceContinuation of DS 3850 under the direction of same or different faculty sponsor. [1-4]

DS3891 - Special Topics in Data ScienceMay be repeated for credit if there is no duplication of topic. [3].

DF2100 - Rapid PrototypingFundamentals of design, prototyping, and entrepreneurship for all disciplines. Practical aspects of modeling and 3D printing functional parts. Machine elements and metrology to facilitate the design process. Operation of 3Dprinters and other CNC machines through CAM, slicers, and G-code. Leveraging AI to produce lighter, stronger, and more compact models (generative design). Students print their own prototypes and iterate on their designs. FALL, SPRING. [3].

DF3860 - Undergraduate Research in Digital FabricationSupervised projects employing digital fabrication tools and techniques under the direction of a faculty sponsor culminating in a report of the activities and findings. Consent of both the faculty sponsor and the Director of the DF minor is required. Prerequisite: DF 2100. [1-3; maximum of 6 hours total]

DF3890 - Special Topics[1-3]

DHUM1100 - Introduction to Digital HumanitiesHands-on experience with essential technologies including digital archives, geospatial humanities, and data and text analysis. History, sub-fields, and major debates; quantitative and qualitative research; intersections of race, gender, and technology; and software studies. Offered on a graded basis only. [3] (HCA)

DHUM1200 - Digital Public HumanitiesDigital technologies engaging the public in the preservation, sharing, and appreciation of cultural heritage, both historical and contemporary. Collections and exhibits, geospatial humanities, 3D environments, storytelling, crowdsourcing, social media, and smartphone applications. Democratic openness, histories of cultural appropriation, and marginalization. Offered on a graded basis only. [3] (HCA)

DHUM1300 - Computational HumanitiesComputational analysis of texts, images, video, and sound recordings. Text analysis and data analysis using Python and R, fundamentals of machine learning, creating and using databases, and statistical modeling for humanities research. Debates and controversies surrounding computational humanities. Writing aboutcomputational research for humanities audiences. No prior statistical or computing experience is necessary.Offered on a graded basis only. [3] (MNS)

DIV7119 - Models of Interfaith EngagementThe contemporary “interfaith” sector is expanding exponentially as more organizations, persons, andgovernments realize the importance of constructive engagement among diverse “religious” traditions. This course maps major models of interfaith engagement (e.g., dialogue, faith-based diplomacy/peacebuilding, service leadership, organizing, etc.) and equips students with the practical and social ethical knowledge needed to be an interfaith leader in varied institutional spaces (e.g., congregations, non-profits, social movements, universities, chaplaincy, and government). With an eye to analysis of power, conflict, and ethical potential, we explore specific historical and contemporary case studies such as the Parliament of World Religions (beginning in 1863); the Black Freedom movement and Black Muslims in the 1950s and 1960s; the Second Ecumenical Council of the Vatican in the 1960s; and the rise of service leadership and community organizing models in the last fifty years in the living wage campaigns, broad-based organizing, and Movements for Black Lives. We engage the emerging field of literature on the interfaith movement, particularly in the U.S., along with questions addressing the categories of “religion” and “secularism” in interfaith movements. [3] Ms. Snarr and Mr. Stauffer Earth and Environmental Sciences

EES1001 - Commons iSeminarTopics vary. General Elective credit only. [1] (No AXLE credit)

EES1030 - OceanographyAn introduction to the geology, biology, chemistry, and physics of the marine environment. [3] (MNS) EES1030L - Oceanography Laboratory

An introduction to the geology, biology, chemistry, and physics of the marine environment. [3] (MNS) EES1030L - Oceanography LaboratoryLaboratory to accompany 1030. Corequisite: 1030. One three-hour laboratory per week. Satisfies the AXLE lab course requirement when completed with 1030. [1] (No AXLE credit)

EES1070 - Volcanoes: Impacts on Earth and SocietyHow magmas form and volcanoes erupt; eruption processes and their hazards to society. Volcanic influence on human history and the evolution of the Earth. NNot open to students who have earned credit for EES 1111-03without permission. Total credit for this course and EES 1111-03 will not exceed 3 hours. Credit hours reduced from second course taken (or from test or transfer credit) as appropriate. [3] (MNS)

EES1080 - Earth and AtmosphereThe science of the atmosphere: principles of weather and climate; the atmosphere as part of the Earth system; weather forecasting; hurricanes, tornadoes, and severe storms; human impacts, such as air pollution and climate change. [3] (P)

EES1081 - Earth and the AtmosphereThe science of the atmosphere: principles of weather and climate; the atmosphere as part of the Earth system; weather forecasting; hurricanes, tornadoes, and severe storms; human impacts, such as air pollution and climate change. [3] (MNS)

EES1081L - Earth and the Atmosphere LabLaboratory to accompany 1081. Corequisite: 1081. One three-hour laboratory per week. Satisfies the AXLE lab course requirement when completed with 1081. [1] (No AXLE credit)

EES1111 - First-Year Writing SeminarIndependent learning and inquiry in an environment in which students can express knowledge and defend opinions through intensive class discussion, oral presentations, and written expression. May be repeated for credit once if there is no duplication of topic, but students may earn only up to 3 credits in any 1111 course per semester of enrollment. [3; maximum of 6 credits total for all semesters of 1111] (AXLE credit category varies by section)

EES1140 - Ecology, Evolution, and Climates through TimeBiological responses to global climate and environmental change through geologic time. Causes of climate change and its impact on biodiversity, including extinction implications. Interactions between climate, environments, and the evolution of organisms, emphasizing vertebrates during the past 65 million years. [3]

EES1400 - Iceland's GeologyProcesses that shape Icelandic landscapes. Volcanoes, glaciers, rivers, ocean, climate. History of interaction between the environment and Icelanders. Introduction at Vanderbilt, two weeks Icelandic field experience; laboratory includes both classroom and field work. Prerequisite: 1510, 1070, or 1111. [4] (MNS)

EES1510 - The Dynamic Earth: Introduction to Geological SciencesProcesses that have changed the earth. Relation between these processes and their products (e.g.,earthquakes, minerals and rocks, mountains, oceanic features); interactions between processes affecting the solid, liquid, and gaseous components of earth; impact on humans. [3] (MNS)

EES1510L - Dynamic Earth LaboratoryLaboratory to accompany 1510. Corequisite: 1510. One three-hour laboratory per week. Satisfies the AXLE lab course requirement when completed with 1510. [1] (No AXLE credit)

EES2110 - Introduction to Climate ChangeScience, policy, history, and causes of climate change on Earth in the last 2 million years; evidence of human impacts on climate since 1850; future climate change and its economic, social, and ecological consequences; economic, technological, and public policy responses. Not open to students who have earned credit for EES3310 without permission. [3] (MNS)

EES2114 - Above and Below the Surface: The Caribbean between Climate Change and TourismCaribbean islands, history, tourism, and ecology. Human-environment interactions. Under water and above water ecologies; Scuba diving and environmental research. Development of interdisciplinary critical thought.Applied research. [3] (INT)

EES2150 - Science, Risk, and PolicyAssessment and management of deadly risks: comparison of markets, regulatory agencies, and courts for managing risks; cultural and scientific construction of risk; psychology of risk perception; case studies such as Hurricane Katrina, mad cow disease, and air pollution. [3] (P)

EES2220W - History of Antarctic Exploration and GovernanceScientific and economic drivers motivating explorers. Late 19th and early 20th century expeditions; geology and scientific discoveries. The Antarctic Treaty and modern governance. Serves as repeat credit for students who completed EES 4891 02 in Fall 2022. [3] (HCA)

EES2309W - Mountains to the Sea: Perspectives on Society, Politics, and the EnvironmentHow physical environments shape politics, religion, economy, cultural practices and infrastructure. Climate, soils, natural hazards, transportation, water, food, and mineral resources. Contestation over climate change and pollution. [3] (INT)

EES2510 - Earth Systems through TimeEffects of feedbacks between the geologic cycles on the lithosphere, hydrosphere, biosphere, and atmosphere at diverse intervals in the Earth's history. Present and future implications. Interpretations of evidence recorded in Earth materials. Three hours of lecture and one laboratory per week. Repeat credit for students who have completed 1020. Prerequisite: 1030 and 1030L, 1081 and 1081L, or 1510 and 1510L. [4] (MNS)

EES2550 - Earth MaterialsSolid materials that make up the earth: rock, soil, and sediment, with emphasis on the minerals that are their major constituents. Hand specimen, optical, and X-ray methods of description and identification. Physical and chemical processes that form and modify earth materials and the use of these materials in interpreting earth processes of the past and present. Field trips. Three lectures and one laboratory per week. Prerequisite: 1030and 1030L, 1081 and 1081L, or 1510 and 1510L. [4] (MNS)

EES2580 - Earth System DynamicsTransport and motion in Earth's systems. Conservation of mass, energy, and momentum over space and time.Earth's processes that lead to and regulate the transport of these quantities. Quantifying Earth's dynamical behavior and describing it with models. Prerequisite: 1030/1030L, 1081/1081L, or 1510/1510L. Co-requisite: MATH 1100, 1201, or 1301. [3] (MNS)

EES3220 - Life Through TimeEcology, classification, and evolution of important groups of fossils, emphasizing invertebrates. Change in marine ecosystems through geologic time. Causes and effects of rapid evolution events and mass extinctions.Three hours of lecture and one laboratory period per week. Corequisite: 2510, 2550, 2580, or CHEM 1602. [4]

EES3260 - PetrologyNature, distribution, and theories of origin of igneous, metamorphic, and sedimentary rocks. Mineralogy as a function of rock-forming conditions. Laboratory emphasis on description and interpretation of rocks, using hand sample and microscope techniques. Field trips. Three lectures and one laboratory period per week. Prerequisite: 2550. [4] (MNS)

EES3280 - Environmental GeochemistryChemistry of Earth's surface including the interaction of solids, liquids, and gases. Earth's biogeochemical cycles. Natural and anthropogenic transformations in the Critical Zone. Collection and analysis of environmental samples in the field. Corequisite 2510, 2550, or 2580. [4] (MNS)

EES3310 - Global Climate ChangeScientific principles and policy applications. Earth's past; evidence of human impact; future climate change; and economic, social, and ecological consequences. Economic, technological, and public policy responses. Serves as repeat credit for EES 2110. Prerequisite: one of 1030, 1080, 1510, BSCI 1510, CHEM 1601, ECON 1010, ES 1401or PHYS 1501, 1601, 1901. [4] (MNS)

EES3330 - SedimentologyThe origin and composition of sedimentary particles, their transportation to the site of deposition, actual deposition, and the processes involved in lithifying sediments into solid rock. Emphasis on interpretation of ancient source areas and depositional environments. Terrigenous, carbonate, and other rock types will be studied. Field trips. Three lectures and one laboratory period. Corequisite 2510, 2550, or 2580. [4] (MNS) EES3333 - Climate and Society: Drowning Cities

The origin and composition of sedimentary particles, their transportation to the site of deposition, actual deposition, and the processes involved in lithifying sediments into solid rock. Emphasis on interpretation of ancient source areas and depositional environments. Terrigenous, carbonate, and other rock types will be studied. Field trips. Three lectures and one laboratory period. Corequisite 2510, 2550, or 2580. [4] (MNS) EES3333 - Climate and Society: Drowning CitiesDescription pending. [3]

EES3340 - Structural Geology and Rock MechanicsPrinciples of rock deformation from microscopic to mountain range scales. Stress and strain; mechanisms of deformation; geometries of faulting and folding. Interpreting geologic maps and constructing cross sections.Applications to tectonics, natural resources, and earthquakes. Corequisite: 2510, 2550, or 2580. [4] (MNS) EES3841 - Directed Study

Applications to tectonics, natural resources, and earthquakes. Corequisite: 2510, 2550, or 2580. [4] (MNS) EES3841 - Directed StudyReadings in related fields and/or laboratory research in pursuit of a scholarly project conceived and executed under the supervision of a faculty member. Open to senior majors and graduate students or by consent of the department chair. Does not count toward minimum requirements for the major. May be repeated for credit more than once if there is no duplication in topic, but students may earn only up to 2 credits per semester of enrollment. [1-2] (No AXLE credit)

EES3842 - Directed StudyReadings in related fields and/or laboratory research in pursuit of a scholarly project conceived and executed under the supervision of a faculty member. Open to senior majors and graduate students or by consent of the department chair. Does not count toward minimum requirements for the major. May be repeated for credit more than once if there is no duplication in topic, but students may earn only up to 2 credits per semester of enrollment. [1-2] (No AXLE credit)

EES3851 - Independent StudyReadings with related field and/or laboratory research in pursuit of a scholarly project conceived and executed under the supervision of a faculty member. Open to senior majors and graduate students. Other students must have consent of department chair. Does not count toward minimum requirements for the major. May berepeated for credit more than once if there is no duplication in topic, but students may earn only up to 3 credits per semester of enrollment. [1-3] (No AXLE credit)

EES3852 - Independent StudyReadings with related field and/or laboratory research in pursuit of a scholarly project conceived and executed under the supervision of a faculty member. Open to senior majors and graduate students. Other students must have consent of department chair. Does not count toward minimum requirements for the major. May berepeated for credit more than once if there is no duplication in topic, but students may earn only up to 3 credits per semester of enrollment. [1-3] (No AXLE credit)

EES3865 - Field InvestigationsContent varies according to location and disciplinary focus. May be repeated for credit more than once if there is no duplication in topic. Students may enroll in more than one section of this course each semester. [1-3] (MNS) EES3875 - Community Engaged Science

Content varies according to location and disciplinary focus. May be repeated for credit more than once if there is no duplication in topic. Students may enroll in more than one section of this course each semester. [1-3] (MNS) EES3875 - Community Engaged SciencePartnering with community organizations addressing real-world problems. Communication, reflection,collaborative problem solving, and environmental justice. May include field and lab work and community meetings. Final projects presented to community audience. Serves as repeat credit for EES 4891, section 01 in spring 2022. Prerequisite 2510, and junior or senior standing. [3] (MNS)

EES3880 - Internship Training in EESUnder faculty supervision, students from any discipline can gain experience in a broad range of public and private organizations focused on work in Earth and Environmental Sciences. Credit hours earned are based upon actual work performed at the internship site. A minimum of 3 credit hours in background readings and research must be completed in 3881 concurrently with and regardless of the number of hours earned in 3880. Athorough/substantial research paper or report must be submitted at the end of the semester during which the internship is completed. These credit hours may NOT count for the EES major or minor. Normally, a 2.7 grade point average, 6 hours of prior work in EES, and prior approval of a specific plan of work by the director of undergraduate studies in EES are required. Offered on a Pass/Fail basis only and must be taken concurrently with 3881. Co-requisite: 3881. [1-9] (No AXLE credit)

EES3881 - Internship Readings and Research in EESUnder faculty supervision, students from any discipline can gain experience in a broad range of public and private organizations focused on work in Earth and Environmental Sciences. Credit hours earned are based upon readings or research supervised by EES faculty to lend some intellectual foundation to the internship experience. A minimum of 3 credit hours in background readings and research must be completed in 3881concurrently with and regardless of the number of hours earned in 3880. A thorough/substantial research paper or report must be submitted at the end of the semester during which the internship training is completed. These credit hours may not count for the EES major or minor. Normally, a 2.7 grade point average, 6 hours of prior work in EES, and prior approval of a specific plan of work by the director of undergraduate studies in EES are required. [3-6]

EES4231 - PaleobiologyMacroevolutionary processes as observed through the fossil record. Inference of evolutionary relationships, physiology, reproduction, behavior, and ecology. Fundamentals of paleobiology, paleoecology, paleoclimates, macroecology, biogeography, geology, geochemistry, anthropology, and conservation paleobiology. Effects of climate change and human impacts, in deep-time. Prerequisite: BSCI 1511. [3] (MNS)

EES4233 - Conservation BiologyEcological, evolutionary, social, and economic aspects of biodiversity loss and ecosystem disruption due to human activities. Climate change, habitat fragmentation, species overexploitation, and invasive species.Sustainable development, habitat restoration, and species reintroduction. Prerequisite: 2510. [3] (MNS) EES4238 - Ecology

Sustainable development, habitat restoration, and species reintroduction. Prerequisite: 2510. [3] (MNS) EES4238 - EcologyPopulation biology, evolutionary ecology, community structure, with emphasis on species interactions, including competition, predation, and symbiosis. Prerequisite: 2510. [3] (MNS)

EES4300 - Earth's Natural ResourcesNatural resource formation, production, and use. Geologic controls on resource distribution. Analysis of historical trends and prediction of future resource availability. Environmental impacts of mining, use, and disposal. Fossil fuels, alternative energy, nuclear fuels, metals, industrial minerals, water, soil, and elements used in agriculture. Synthesis of knowledge from the geosciences, chemistry, engineering, and economics. Prerequisite: junior standing. [3] (MNS)

EES4420 - GeomorphologyAnalysis of the Earth's landforms, their morphology, history, and the processes that form them. The building of relief and its subsequent transformation by geologic processes on hillslopes, rivers, coasts, wetlands, and glaciers. The natural history and human impacts on land forms. Field trips. Familiarity with basic physics (mechanics) is expected. Prerequisite: 1030 or 1081 or 1510. [3] (MNS)

EES4440 - Glacial GeologyMetamorphism of snow and ice; mass balance at snow and ice surfaces; and rheology of ice. Destruction and creation of landscapes by glacial movement and debris. Response of ice bodies to changes in climate; physical, chemical, and biological evidence of climate change; and methods of paleoclimate reconstruction. Glacial impacts on societies through sea-level, hazards, coastlines, and water supplies. Prerequisite: 1030 or 1081 or 1510. [3] (MNS)

EES4480 - Mass ExtinctionsSynthesizing causes, consequences, and dynamics of past mass extinction events. Using fossil records to interpret current and future trends in biodiversity loss. Prerequisite: 2510 or 2580 [3] (MNS)

EES4550 - Transport Processes in Earth and Environmental SystemsPrinciples of conservation and constitutive transport laws; classic and emerging styles of modeling natural systems. Prior study of basic calculus (functions, derivatives, integrals) and physics (mechanics) is expected.Prerequisite: senior or graduate standing with a major in Earth and Environmental Sciences, Biological Sciences, Chemistry, Mathematics, Physics, or the School of Engineering. [3] (MNS)

EES4600 - GeochemistryApplication of chemistry to study the distribution and cycling of elements in the crust of the earth. Includes chemical bonding and crystallization, phase rules and phase diagrams, chemical equilibria, theories on the origin of elements, earth, ocean, atmosphere, and crust. Prerequisite: 2550 and CHEM 1602. [3] (MNS) EES4650 - Physics of the Climate System

Application of chemistry to study the distribution and cycling of elements in the crust of the earth. Includes chemical bonding and crystallization, phase rules and phase diagrams, chemical equilibria, theories on the origin of elements, earth, ocean, atmosphere, and crust. Prerequisite: 2550 and CHEM 1602. [3] (MNS) EES4650 - Physics of the Climate SystemPhysical processes affecting the climate system. Global energy balance of Earth and planets. Surface temperature and how it is regulated. Electromagnetic radiation and its interaction with atmospheric gases, clouds, and aerosols. Ocean heat storage, cloud and precipitation processes, and the impact of sea and inland ice on temperature. Processes that govern the water and carbon cycle. [3] (MNS)

EES4680 - PaleoclimatesFluctuations in Earth's climate with an emphasis on the past 700 million years. Forcings and feedback that influence climate and drive change. Techniques used to reconstruct past climate change using marine and terrestrial geologic deposits and geochronologic methods. Prerequisite: 2110 and ENVS 1101; or corequisite: 2510, 2550, or 2580. [3] (MNS)

EES4750 - Sustainability: An Environmental Science PerspectivePrinciples, problems, and solutions of environmental sustainability, with a focus on the links among the environment, society, and economy. Prerequisite: junior standing. [3] (MNS)

EES4760 - Agent- and Individual-Based Computational ModelingApplications in natural, social, and behavioral sciences and engineering. Designing, programming, and documenting models. Using models for experiments. Examples from environmental science, ecology,economics, urban planning, and medicine. Familiarity with basic statistics and proficiency in algebra are expected. [3] (MNS)

EES4820 - Paleoecological MethodsTools used to interpret past environments and climates, including plant microfossils, pollen and phytoliths, vertebrate morphology, and dental microwear and mesowear. Geochemical tools such as stable isotopes and rare earth elements. Integrating methods for paleontological and anthropological studies, including the use of databases and meta-analyses. Readings from primary sources. Prerequisite: 1030 or 1081 or 1510. [3] (MNS) EES4830 - Volcanic Processes

Tools used to interpret past environments and climates, including plant microfossils, pollen and phytoliths, vertebrate morphology, and dental microwear and mesowear. Geochemical tools such as stable isotopes and rare earth elements. Integrating methods for paleontological and anthropological studies, including the use of databases and meta-analyses. Readings from primary sources. Prerequisite: 1030 or 1081 or 1510. [3] (MNS) EES4830 - Volcanic ProcessesNature, behavior, and origin of volcanoes. Magmatic processes that lead to eruptions. Eruptive processes and volcano construction. Impacts of volcanism on Earth's surface environment. Prerequisite: 3260. [3] (MNS) EES4891 - Special Topics

Nature, behavior, and origin of volcanoes. Magmatic processes that lead to eruptions. Eruptive processes and volcano construction. Impacts of volcanism on Earth's surface environment. Prerequisite: 3260. [3] (MNS) EES4891 - Special TopicsTopics vary. May be repeated for credit more than once by permission of the director of undergraduate studies.Students may enroll in more than one section of this course each semester. Prerequisite: 1030 or 1510 or 1081.[1-3] (No AXLE credit)

EES4951 - Career Pathways in the Earth and Environmental SciencesInteractions with professionals to learn about their personal journeys and current opportunities. Goals, knowledge, and skills to create materials and professional plans. Open only to junior EES majors and minors. [1]

EES4961 - Senior SeminarIntegrating concepts and information from diverse fields. Offered on a graded basis only. Limited to seniors in the final semester of the major. [1] (No AXLE credit)

EES4996 - Senior Honors Seminar IResearch methods and scientific writing and communication, including work towards senior honors project, thesis, and oral presentation. Open only to senior departmental honors candidates. Does not count toward minimum requirements for major. Corequisite: 4998 [1] (No Axle Credit)

EES4997 - Senior Honors Seminar IIResearch methods and scientific writing and communication, including work towards senior honors project, thesis, and oral presentation. Open only to senior departmental honors candidates. Does not count toward minimum requirements for major. Prerequisite: 4996, Corequisite: 4999 [1] (No AXLE Credit)

EES4998 - Senior Honors ResearchIndependent research under faculty supervision that culminates in an oral presentation and written thesis submitted to the faculty. Open only to departmental honors candidates. Does not count toward minimum requirements for the major. [2] (No AXLE credit)

EES4999 - Senior Honors ResearchIndependent research under faculty supervision that culminates in an oral presentation and written thesis submitted to the faculty. Open only to departmental honors candidates. Does not count toward minimum requirements for the major. [2] (No AXLE credit)

ECON1001 - Commons iSeminarTopics vary. General Elective credit only. [1] (No AXLE credit)

ECON1010 - Principles of MacroeconomicsThe role of scarcity and prices in allocating resources. National income, fluctuations in unemployment and price level, monetary and fiscal policy. [3] (SBS)

ECON1020 - Principles of MicroeconomicsThe behavior of households and business in markets. Competition, monopoly, and rivalry in product and factor markets. Equilibrium. Income distribution. International trade. Prerequisite: 1010. [3] (SBS)

ECON1111 - First-Year Writing SeminarIndependent learning and inquiry in an environment in which students can express knowledge and defend opinions through intensive class discussion, oral presentations, and written expression. May be repeated for credit once if there is no duplication of topic, but students may earn only up to 3 credits in any 1111 course per semester of enrollment. [3; maximum of 6 credits total for all semesters of 1111] (AXLE credit category varies by section)

ECON1500 - Economic StatisticsThe use of quantitative data in understanding economic phenomena. Probability, sampling, inference, and regression analysis. Not open to students who have earned credit for 1510. Total credit for this course and 1510will not exceed 3 credit hours. Credit hours reduced from second course taken (or from test or transfer credit) as appropriate. Prerequisite: Math 1100, 1200, or 1300. [3] (SBS)

ECON1510 - Intensive Economic StatisticsQuantitative techniques in economic analysis. Probability sampling, inference, and multiple regression. Not open to students who have earned credit for 1500. Total credit for this course and 1500 will not exceed 3 credit hours. Credit hours reduced from second course taken (or from test or transfer credit) as appropriate.Prerequisite: MATH 1100, 1200 or 1300. [3] (SBS)

ECON2100 - Labor EconomicsIntroduction to labor markets in the United States. Foundations and applications of labor supply and demand, immigration and immigration policies, investment in human capital, wage policies of employers, minimum wage legislation, labor market discrimination and remedial programs, effects of labor unions, and unemployment.Prerequisite: 1010 and 1020. [3] (SBS)

ECON2150 - Economic History of the United StatesEconomic development of the United States from the Colonial period to the present. Interrelated changes in economic performance, technology, institutions, and governmental policy. Prerequisite: 1010 and 1020. [3] (US) ECON2160 - Strategic Analysis

Economic development of the United States from the Colonial period to the present. Interrelated changes in economic performance, technology, institutions, and governmental policy. Prerequisite: 1010 and 1020. [3] (US) ECON2160 - Strategic AnalysisIntroduction to sequential and simultaneous games. Backward induction, equilibrium, pure and mixed strategies.Cooperation and conflict, the prisoner's dilemma, threats, promises, and credibility. Brinkmanship, uncertainty, the role of information, auction design, bidding strategies, and bargaining. Voting and agenda control.Prerequisite: 1010 and 1020. [3] (SBS)

ECON2170 - Environmental EconomicsPublic policies to address market failures. Energy policy, climate change, biodiversity, globalization, and population growth. Sustainable economic activity, recycling, valuing environmental amenities, addressing ethical dilemmas, and resolving disputes. Offered on a graded basis only. Prerequisite: 1010 and 1020. [3] (SBS) ECON2180 - Sports Economics

Public policies to address market failures. Energy policy, climate change, biodiversity, globalization, and population growth. Sustainable economic activity, recycling, valuing environmental amenities, addressing ethical dilemmas, and resolving disputes. Offered on a graded basis only. Prerequisite: 1010 and 1020. [3] (SBS) ECON2180 - Sports EconomicsIntercollegiate and professional sports leagues. Competitive balance, player labor markets, and owner capital markets. Theories of league expansion, rival leagues, franchise relocation, and sports venue finance.Comparisons of international sports leagues. Offered on a graded basis only. Prerequisite: 1010 and 1020. [3]

ECON2210 - Economics and Legal InstitutionsTheoretical study of legal institutions. Economic consequences of legal frameworks as they pertain to individual and group behavior. Prerequisite: ECON 1020. [3] (SBS)

ECON2220 - Latin American DevelopmentEconomic growth and structural change. Historical legacies, import-substitution, debt crisis, inflation, and macroeconomic stabilization. Regional and national economic integration, migration, and conflict. Poverty, inequality, and policies. No credit for graduate students in economics. Prerequisite: 1010. [3] (SBS) ECON2260 - International Economics

Economic growth and structural change. Historical legacies, import-substitution, debt crisis, inflation, and macroeconomic stabilization. Regional and national economic integration, migration, and conflict. Poverty, inequality, and policies. No credit for graduate students in economics. Prerequisite: 1010. [3] (SBS) ECON2260 - International EconomicsCauses, consequences, and conduct of economic interactions among sovereign nations. Trade in goods and services; international monetary and financial interactions; winners and losers; exchange rates and the balance of payments; economic organizations. Offered on a graded basis only. Prerequisite: 1010 and 1020. [3] (SBS).

ECON2300 - Money and BankingA study of commercial banks and other intermediaries between savers and investors in the United States, including the government's role as money creator, lender, and regulator of private credit, and the effects of financial institutions on aggregate economic activity. Prerequisite: 1010 and 1020. [3] (SBS)

ECON2340 - Plunder and Pillage: The Economics of Warfare and ConflictInternational and domestic economic conflict. Offensive and defensive strategies. Fortifications, strategic bombing, and conscription. Corporate takeovers, bargaining failures, and labor strikes. Prerequisites: 1010 and 1020. [3] (SBS)

ECON2350 - Health Care PolicyHealth care markets in the United States. Supply and demand, social insurance policies, pharmaceuticals, malpractice, and health care reform. Prerequisite: 1010 and 1020. [3] (SBS)

ECON2890 - Special TopicsTopics of special interest. May be repeated for credit more than once if there is no duplication in topic. Students may enroll in more than one section of this course each semester. Prerequisite: 1010 and 1020. [3] (No AXLE

ECON3010 - Intermediate Microeconomic TheoryDevelopment of the techniques of analysis for problems of resource allocation. Theories of choice and production for individual economic agents in competitive and monopolistic environments. Behavior of markets.Determination of prices, wages, interest, rent, and profit. Income distribution. Not open to students who have earned credit for 3012. Total credit for this course and 3012 will not exceed 3 credit hours. Credit hours reduced from second course taken (or from test or transfer credit) as appropriate. Prerequisite: 1010, 1020, and either MATH 1100, 1200, or 1300. [3] (SBS)

ECON3012 - MicroeconomicsConsumer choice and firm behavior from the fundamentals of preference and production theory. Calculus-based optimization. Price-determination, analysis of market equilibrium, perfect competition and the effect of market power in monopolies and oligopolies. Efficiency, welfare, and market failures. Not open to students who have earned credit for 3010. Total credit for this course and 3010 will not exceed 3 credit hours. Credit hours reduced from second course taken (or from test or transfer credit) as appropriate. Prerequisite: 1010, 1020, and either MATH 1201 or 1301. [3] (SBS)

ECON3020 - Intermediate Macroeconomic TheoryNational income accounting and analysis. Classical, Keynesian, and contemporary models determining national income, employment, liquidity, price level, and economic growth. Not open to students who have earned credit for 3022. Total credit for this course and 3022 will not exceed 3 credit hours. Credit hours reduced from second course taken (or from test or transfer credit) as appropriate. Prerequisite: 1010, 1020, and either MATH 1100, 1200, or 1300. [3] (SBS)

ECON3022 - MacroeconomicsContemporary models of national income, employment, interest rates, price level, and economic growth.Decisions underlying consumption and investment behavior, as well as the effect of government policies. Not open to students who have earned credit for 3020. Total credit for this course and 3020 will not exceed 3 credit hours. Credit hours reduced from second course taken (or from test or transfer credit) as appropriate.Prerequisite: 1010, 1020, and either MATH 1201 or 1301. [3] (SBS)

ECON3032 - Applied EconometricsQuantitative economic analysis with emphasis on multivariate regression. Measurement, specification, estimation, inference, prediction, and interpretation of econometric models. Experience with data and computer applications. Not open to students who have earned credit for 3035 or 3050. Total credit for this course and 3035 will not exceed 3 credit hours. Total credit for this course and 3050 will not exceed 3 credit hours. Credit hours reduced from second course taken (or from test or transfer credit) as appropriate. Prerequisite: 1020; either 1500, 1510, or both MATH 2820L and either MATH 2810 or 2820; and either Math 1201 or 1301. [3] (SBS) ECON3035 - Econometric Methods

Quantitative economic analysis with emphasis on multivariate regression. Measurement, specification, estimation, inference, prediction, and interpretation of econometric models. Experience with data and computer applications. Not open to students who have earned credit for 3035 or 3050. Total credit for this course and 3035 will not exceed 3 credit hours. Total credit for this course and 3050 will not exceed 3 credit hours. Credit hours reduced from second course taken (or from test or transfer credit) as appropriate. Prerequisite: 1020; either 1500, 1510, or both MATH 2820L and either MATH 2810 or 2820; and either Math 1201 or 1301. [3] (SBS) ECON3035 - Econometric MethodsProperties and problems in estimating economic relationships with multiple regression. Statistical and econometric theory to address empirical questions. Hands-on experience with economic data analysis with programming in statistical software. Not open to students who have earned credit for 3032 or 3050. Total credit for this course and 3032 will not exceed 3 credit hours. Total credit for this course and 3050 will not exceed 3credit hours. Credit hours reduced from second course taken (or from test or transfer credit) as appropriate.Prerequisite: 1020, either 1500, 1510, or both MATH 2820L and either MATH 2810 or 2820; and either Math 1201 or 1301. [3] (SBS)

ECON3050 - Introduction to EconometricsQuantitative methods of economic analysis. Measurement, specification, estimation, and interpretation of economic models. Econometric computation using microcomputers. Not open to students who have earnedcredit for 3032 or 3035. Total credit for this course and 3032 will not exceed 3 credit hours. Total credit for this course and 3035 will not exceed 3 credit hours. Credit hours reduced from second course taken (or from test or transfer credit) as appropriate. Not offered after AY 2019-20. Prerequisite: 3010 or 3012 and either 1500 or 1510; or MATH 2820L with either MATH 2810 or MATH 2820. [3] (SBS)

ECON3100 - Wages, Employment, and Labor MarketsTheories and empirical evidence of the determinants of wages and employment. Compensating differentials, education and human capital, migration and labor mobility, discrimination, incentive pay, wage inequality.Prerequisite: 3010 or 3012. [3] (SBS)

ECON3110 - Poverty and DiscriminationTheories and empirical evidence concerning inequality, poverty, and discrimination, and their relationship to economic growth. Evaluation of anti-poverty and anti-discrimination policies. Prerequisite: 3012; and one of 3032, 3035. [3] (SBS)

Analysis of major issues and debates in American economic history. Prerequisite: 3010 or 3012. [3] (US) ECON3160 - Economic History of EuropeSources of Western European economic progress. Organization of overseas merchant empires, origins of the Industrial Revolution, the role of property rights, demographic patterns, and changing living standards.Prerequisite: 3010 or 3012. [3] (SBS)

ECON3170 - Environmental and Natural Resource EconomicsTheories of benefit-cost analysis, externalities, and public goods applied to study environmental market failures.Empirical methods applied to nonmarket valuation of environmental amenities and policy evaluation. Theories of optimal control and use applied to study energy, forests, fisheries, water, and climate change. Prerequisites: 3012; 3032 or 3035. [3] (SBS)

ECON3200 - Public FinanceTheories of the state and collective decisions, fiscal federalism, public goods and externalities. Tax theory: equity, efficiency, and growth. Taxation of goods, factors, and corporations. Cost-benefit analysis. Prerequisite: 3010 or 3012. [3] (SBS)

ECON3210 - Economics of EducationModels of educational investment and role of government in education provision. Effects of education on social and economic outcomes, the behavior of institutions that produce education, and the design andimplementation of public policies that affect the level and distribution of educational resources. Prerequisite: ECON 3012. [3] (SBS)

ECON3230 - Urban EconomicsUrban growth, development of suburbs, location of firms, housing markets, transportation, property taxes, and local government services. Offered on a graded basis only. Prerequisite: 3010 or 3012. [3] (SBS)

ECON3250 - Industrial OrganizationModels of market structure and behavior from monopoly and oligopoly to perfect competition. Strategic interaction between a firm and its customers and between a firm and its competitors. Firm practices and government policies that promote or hinder the efficient operation of markets. Offered on a graded basis only.Prerequisite: 3010 or 3012. [3] (SBS)

ECON3270 - Economics of Information and Communications TechnologyThe Internet, cloud computing, social networks, e-commerce, and Internet telephony as influencers of commerce and consumer welfare. Streaming content, big data, informatics, and open source software in economic perspective. Property rights, competition, and regulation in cyberspace. Prerequisite: 3010 or 3012.[3] (SBS)

ECON3300 - Financial Instruments and MarketsTheoretical and empirical approaches to the analysis of monetary and other financial instruments. Portfolio analysis, interest rate risk, and financial futures and options markets. Prerequisite: Either 3010 or 3012; and either 3020 or 3022. [3] (SBS)

ECON3330 - Economics of RiskDecision making under risk and uncertainty. Expected utility, risk aversion, and the value of information.Investments, insurance, and lotteries. Moral hazard and adverse selection. Prospect theory. Serves as repeat credit for ECON 3893-01 in Fall 2016. Prerequisite: 3010 (or 3012) with either 1500 or 1510; or Math 2820L with either Math 2810 or Math 2820. [3] (SBS)

ECON3350 - Economics of HealthECON3600 - International TradeCourse DescriptionInternational trade in goods and services. Patterns of trade; gains and losses from trade, tariffs, and other commercial policies; economic integration; and international factor movements. Offered on a graded basis only.Prerequisite: 3010 or 3012. [3] (SBS)

ECON3600 - International TradeInternational trade in goods and services. Patterns of trade; gains and losses from trade, tariffs, and other commercial policies; economic integration; and international factor movements. Offered on a graded basis only.Prerequisite: 3010 or 3012. [3] (SBS)

ECON3610 - International FinanceEconomics of international monetary, financial, and macroeconomic relationships. Effects of monetary and fiscal politics in open economies, balance of payments, exchange rate determination, and international monetary institutions. Prerequisite: 3020 or 3022. [3] (SBS)

ECON3650 - Development EconomicsDeterminants of national economic growth for pre-industrial and newly industrial countries. Inequality and poverty. Imperfect credit markets and microfinance. Political constraints and corruption. Policy issues relevant to developing economics. Prerequisite: 3010 or 3012, and either 1500, 1510, 3032, 3035, or 3050. [3] (INT) ECON3698 - Junior Honors Research

Determinants of national economic growth for pre-industrial and newly industrial countries. Inequality and poverty. Imperfect credit markets and microfinance. Political constraints and corruption. Policy issues relevant to developing economics. Prerequisite: 3010 or 3012, and either 1500, 1510, 3032, 3035, or 3050. [3] (INT) ECON3698 - Junior Honors ResearchHonors thesis proposal under the supervision of a thesis adviser and the Director of Honors. Open only to junior majors with the approval of the Director of Honors. Prerequisite: 3010 or 3012. [1] (No AXLE credit) ECON3700 - Economic Growth

Honors thesis proposal under the supervision of a thesis adviser and the Director of Honors. Open only to junior majors with the approval of the Director of Honors. Prerequisite: 3010 or 3012. [1] (No AXLE credit) ECON3700 - Economic GrowthDeterminants of macroeconomic growth. Mathematical theories of exogenous and endogenous growth.Comparison of growth rates across countries and time. The effect of growth rates on economic well-being. The effect of tax rates. Prerequisite: 3010 or 3012, and 3020 or 3022. [3] (SBS)

ECON3750 - Econometrics for Big DataEconometric methods for analyzing large datasets. Model selection, regularization, classification, resampling, tree-based methods, and support vector machines. Forecasting stock prices, prediction of housing prices, and determination of wages. Prerequisite: 3010 or 3012; either 3032, 3035, 3050; or MATH 2820L with MATH 2810or 2820. [3] (SBS)

ECON3851 - Independent Study in EconomicsA program of independent reading in economics, arranged in consultation with an adviser. Limited to students having written permission from an instructor and the director of undergraduate studies. Prerequisite: 3010 or 3012. [Variable credit: 1-3 each semester, or 1-6 for departmental honors candidates; maximum of 12 hours in 3851 and 3852 combined for departmental honors students; maximum of 6 hours in 3851 and 3852 combined for other students] (No AXLE credit)

ECON3852 - Independent Study in EconomicsA program of independent reading in economics, arranged in consultation with an adviser. Limited to students having written permission from an instructor and the director of undergraduate studies. Prerequisite: 3010 or 3012. [Variable credit: 1-3 each semester, or 1-6 for departmental honors candidates; maximum of 12 hours in 3851 and 3852 combined for departmental honors students; maximum of 6 hours in 3851 and 3852 combined for other students] (No AXLE credit)

ECON3893 - Selected Microeconomic TopicsTopics vary. May be repeated for credit more than once if there is no duplication in topic. Students may enroll in more than one section of this course each semester. Prerequisite: 3010 or 3012. [3] (No AXLE credit) ECON3894 - Selected Macroeconomic Topics

Topics vary. May be repeated for credit more than once if there is no duplication in topic. Students may enroll in more than one section of this course each semester. Prerequisite: 3010 or 3012. [3] (No AXLE credit) ECON3894 - Selected Macroeconomic TopicsTopics vary. May be repeated for credit more than once if there is no duplication in topic. Students may enroll in more than one section of this course each semester. Prerequisite: 3020 or 3022. [3] (No AXLE credit) ECON4050 - Topics in Econometrics

Topics vary. May be repeated for credit more than once if there is no duplication in topic. Students may enroll in more than one section of this course each semester. Prerequisite: 3020 or 3022. [3] (No AXLE credit) ECON4050 - Topics in EconometricsEmphasis on applications. May include generalized method of moments, empirical likelihood, resampling methods, and nonparametric techniques. Prerequisite: 3032, 3035, or 3050. [3] (SBS)

ECON4110 - Macroeconomic Models for Policy AnalysisMathematical models of overlapping generations, rational expectations, and open economies with price rigidities applied to social security, government debt, exchange rates, monetary policy, and time inconsistent optimal policy. Prerequisite: 3020 or 3022. [3] (SBS)

ECON4210 - Law and EconomicsThe influence of legal rules and institutions on the behavior of individuals and on economic efficiency and equity. Applications from civil procedure as well as property, contract, tort, and criminal law. Offered on a graded basis only. Prerequisite: 3010 or 3012 and either 1500, 1510, 3032, 3035, or 3050. [3] (SBS)

ECON4220 - Social Choice TheoryStrategic and non-strategic social choice theory. Preference aggregation, formal models of voting, and matching. Prerequisite: 3010 or 3012 or PHIL 3003 or any Mathematics course numbered 2500 or above. [3]

ECON4230 - Political Economy of ElectionsMicroeconomic and game-theory analysis of political institutions and elections. Study of party and candidate positioning; efficiency of political competition; polarization; and information provision and processing.Prerequisite: 3012 or PSCI 2259. [3] (SBS)

ECON4240 - Political Economy of Institutions and DevelopmentTheoretical mathematical and empirical models; nations’ prosperity or poverty. Institutions as factors for disparity in economic development. Familiarity with basic methods of regression analysis is expected. No credit for students who completed ECON 3893 section 01 offered fall 2022. Prerequisite or corequisite: ECON 3012 or PSCI 2259. [3] (SBS)

ECON4260 - Game Theory with Economic ApplicationsRational decision-making in non-cooperative, multi-person games. Single play and repeated games with complete and incomplete information. Economic applications of games, such as auctions, labor-management bargaining, pricing and output decisions in oligopoly, and common property resources. Prerequisite: 3010 or 3012. [3] (SBS)

ECON4280 - Experimental EconomicsDesign, methodology, and interpretation of economic experiments. Laboratory experiments with applications in labor markets, discrimination, and voluntary contributions. Offered on a graded basis only. Not open to students who have earned credit for 3893 section 01 offered fall 2019. Prerequisite: 3010 or 3012; and 1500 or 1510, or MATH 2820L with MATH 2810 or MATH 2820. [3] (SBS)

ECON4510 - Seminar in Macroeconomic PolicyIntensive study of three or four current problems in economic policy. Studies in topics such as macroeconomic policy for the year ahead, financial market issues, international economic policy issues. Repeat credit for students who have completed 4510W. Limited to majors in economics and public policy. Prerequisite: 3010 or 3012; and 3020 or 3022. [3] (SBS)

ECON4510W - Seminar in Macroeconomic PolicyIntensive study of three or four current problems in economic policy. Studies in topics such as macroeconomic policy for the year ahead, financial market issues, international economic policy issues. Repeat credit for students who have completed 4510. Limited to majors in economics and public policy. Prerequisite: 3010 or 3012; and 3020 or 3022. [3] (SBS)

ECON4520W - Seminar on GlobalizationCauses of global economic integration. Winners and losers. World Trade Organization, internationalenvironmental treaties, labor and capital markets. U.S. leadership. Offered on a graded basis only. Prerequisite: 3010 or 3012; and either 1500, 1510, 3032, 3035, or 3050. [3] (SBS)

ECON4530 - Seminar in Microeconomic PolicyECON4530W - Seminar in Microeconomic PolicyCourse DescriptionIntensive study of three or four current problems in microeconomic policy. Repeat credit for students who have completed 4530. Limited to majors in economics and public policy. Prerequisite: 3010 or 3012. [3] (SBS) ECON4540W - Economics of Conflict

ECON4530W - Seminar in Microeconomic PolicyIntensive study of three or four current problems in microeconomic policy. Repeat credit for students who have completed 4530. Limited to majors in economics and public policy. Prerequisite: 3010 or 3012. [3] (SBS) ECON4540W - Economics of Conflict

Intensive study of three or four current problems in microeconomic policy. Repeat credit for students who have completed 4530. Limited to majors in economics and public policy. Prerequisite: 3010 or 3012. [3] (SBS) ECON4540W - Economics of ConflictEconomic relationships that appropriate value from other parties. War, crime, litigation, family quarrels, and rent-seeking. The visible hand, principal-agent problems, and negative sum games. Prerequisite: 3010 or 3012.[3] (SBS)

ECON4550 - Seminar in Sports EconomicsIssues and debates. Offered on a graded basis only. Prerequisite: 2180, and 3010 or 3012. [3] (SBS)

ECON4981 - Honors SeminarDiscussion of selected topics and senior thesis research. Open only to seniors in the departmental honors program. Prerequisite: 3010 or 3012. [1] (No AXLE credit)

ECON4982 - Honors SeminarDiscussion of selected topics and senior thesis research. Open only to seniors in the departmental honors program. Prerequisite: 3010 or 3012. [1] (No AXLE credit)

ECON4998 - Senior ThesisLimited to and required of all candidates for departmental honors. Prerequisite: 3010 or 3012. [1-3] (No AXLE

ECON4999 - Senior ThesisLimited to and required of all candidates for departmental honors. Prerequisite: 3010 or 3012. [1-3] (No AXLE

EDUC1001 - Commons iSeminarCommons iSeminar, a 1-hour small seminar experience, open to first-year students. Students and faculty will collaboratively explore a specialized topic in depth in this university-wide seminar sponsored by The Ingram Commons. General Elective credit only. [1]

EDUC1220 - Society, the School, and the TeacherIntroduces the relationship between society's goals and those of the school. Studies the community setting and the school, the social, political, and instructional organization of a school, and the roles and values of a teacher.Field experience. [3]

EDUC1227 - Society, the School, and the TeacherIntroduces the relationship between society's goals and those of the school. Studies the community setting and the school, the social, political, and instructional organization of a school, and the roles and values of a teacher.Writing intensive. [3]

EDUC2160 - Cultural Diversity in American Education(Also listed as SPED 2060) Focuses on cultural diversity and the ways in which it has been defined and treated in the American educational system. An interdisciplinary perspective informs the course, with particular attention to history, sociology, psychology, anthropology, and educational literatures. [3]

EDUC3120 - Children in Families and SchoolsExamines the cultural, social-political, historical, and collaborative influences of families and educational institutions on children's development and learning. Emphasis on understanding family-school connections and developing partnerships to foster maximum growth of children. [3]

EDUC3140 - Learning and Development in Early Childhood EducationApplying an understanding of learning and development, students examine a variety of early childhood curriculum models based upon their assumptions about learning and development. Students consider how the role of the classroom teacher and the establishment of classroom norms are shaped by each curricular model.An imbedded 20-hour practicum enables students to see different curricular models and to interact with preschool children. [3]

EDUC3212 - Introduction to Reading Processes and AssessmentDevelops an understanding of reading and of elementary students as readers. Examines theoretical models, approaches, and the development of reading in elementary classrooms. Candidates will investigate how children learn to read, explore assessments that reveal student understanding of reading, and apply this knowledge in scaffolding reading with individual students. Provides informal assessment and teaching experiences within a school setting. [3]

EDUC3214 - Theory and Methods of Reading Instruction in Elementary SchoolsExamines approaches, strategies, and methods for teaching reading in elementary classrooms with attention paid to philosophies and principles of instructional practice designed to individualize instruction and support literacy development. Discusses underlying concepts and theories pertaining to literacy instruction and relates these to classroom practice. Although grounded in the philosophy that reading and writing are not discrete entities, the course focuses on reading. Prerequisite: EDUC 3212; Corequisite: EDUC 3215 and EDUC 3216. [3]

EDUC3215 - Language Arts in Elementary SchoolsExamines the nature of language development in the elementary school years with attention paid to principles and practices for teaching English language arts, particularly related to writing instruction. Consideration of instructional practices designed to individualize instruction and support literacy development will occur.Prerequisite: EDUC 3212; Corequisite: EDUC 3214 and EDUC 3216. [3]

EDUC3216 - Practicum in Teaching Elementary Reading and Language Arts: Field experiences in a variety of elementary classroom settings designed to provide practical experience and reflection on the teaching of reading and the language arts. Prerequisite: EDUC 3212; Corequisite: EDUC 3214and EDUC 3215. [1]

EDUC3240 - Practicum in Elementary Science and Social StudiesField experiences in a variety of school, grade level, and instructional settings, designed to integrate and apply teaching skills developed in the elementary science and social studies methods courses. Corequisite: SCED3240 and SSED 3240. [1]

EDUC3270 - Managing Instructional SettingsExamines several planning and management philosophies and a variety of practices for use with early childhood and/or elementary school students. [2]

EDUC3280 - Planning & Assesmnt StrategiesStudents will explore the research-based curriculum design process of backwards planning by learning about the theory behind teaching toward a course Big Idea, essential questions, and identified content standards.Students will also learn how to identify and write equity-based classroom assessments and lesson plans. The course has a field-embedded component that requires students to spend 9 to 12 hours in the field. [3]

EDUC3310 - Classroom EcologyThis course explores how teachers make design choices for an environment that creates optimal conditions for student learning. Design elements include social and cultural contexts of learning, social/emotional learning, motivations for learning, and appropriate assessments. This is an introductory general methods class. Students will take specific methods classes in their area of teaching. [3]

EDUC3620 - Social and Philosophical Aspects of EducationExploration of the interaction between contemporary social problems and various philosophies in relation to educational theory, policy, and practice. [3]

EDUC3720 - Principles for Teaching English Language Learner StudentsThis course, specifically designed for non-ELL majors, provides an overview of theoretically and empirically supported practices concerning the education of English language learners (ELLs) in grades PreK-12. Topics include: the role of second language acquisition in academic achievement, instructional strategies for developing English listening, speaking, reading and writing while accessing the core curriculum, appropriate assessment of ELLs in the classroom, the importance of ELLs home language and culture, and ESL research and history relating to policies and programs affecting ELLs. Consideration of how to attain more equitable outcomes for ELLs through schooling is a major focus of this course. [3]

EDUC3730 - English Language Learner Educational FoundationsThis course focuses on understanding the processes of second language acquisition, learning, development, and individual, cognitive, and social factors that influence second language learning in North America (particularly in the United States). In addition, it examines the theoretical, historical, political, legal, and research bases for the education of students from linguistically and culturally diverse populations. Program models and the theoretical bases for these models are covered in this course. National policies and current issues relevant to the learning of English language learners are emphasized. [3]

EDUC3731 - Practicum for Teaching English Language Learners IA fieldbased practicum working with students who are English language learners. Experience will include use of students' native languages and/or ESL instructional components. Corequisite EDUC 3730. [1]

EDUC3740 - Methods and Materials of Multilingual EducationThis course focuses on bilingual (native language and ESL) curriculum development and instruction for students (preK-12) in a variety of language and program settings. Second-language instructional theory and practice, materials selection and development for LEP children, and bilingual and ESL literacy and content area instruction (mathematics, science, social studies, and English education) are covered. Frameworks for evaluating curriculum materials and their instructional recommendations for ELL students are provided.Corequisite: 1 hour of EDUC 3742. [3]

EDUC3742 - Practicum: Multilingual LearnersIn this practicum, students will work in a classroom with multilingual learners and a mentor teacher. Students will observe their mentor teacher, support learners, plan and implement lessons, reflect on their instruction, analyze factors that support learning, discuss and act on feedback, and make plans for ongoing professional learning. Students will meet regularly with a university supervisor. This course is required for ESL Endorsement and TESOL Certificate. Corequisite with EDUC 3740. [3]

EDUC3750 - Linguistics and Language Acquisition for English Language Learner TeachersThis course focuses on the applying of theories of linguistics and second language acquisition to the teaching of English language learners. Topics covered include the structure of the English language, English as a system, language acquisition and development, language variation, and theories of second language acquisition. [3]

EDUC3760 - Assessment of English Language LearnersThis course focuses on the theoretical and practical aspects of language testing for second-language learners.Instruments used by educators to assess the language proficiency and academic achievement of linguistically diverse students are presented and demonstrated. The course examines the purposes and types of language tests in relation to theories of language use and language teaching goals; discusses testing practices and procedures related to language teaching and language research; and includes the planning, writing, and administration of tests, basic descriptive statistics, and test analysis. Rubrics for relating assessment information to instruction and program planning are developed within this course. [3]

EDUC3763 - Practicum for Teaching English Language Learners IIIA field-based practicum working with students who are English language learners. Experience will include use of students' native languages and/or ESL instructional components. Corequisite: EDUC 3760. [13]

EDUC3770 - Language Socialization and VariationThis course provides a sociocultural view of language development and use in the US. Specific topics covered include examination of components and characteristics of language structure as they relate to dialectal variation, discourse patterns and ways in which they relate to discourse differences among dialect groups. We will analyze the socio-political nature of language standards and "standard" usage and investigate ways in which teachers can integrate dialect diversity into the language arts classroom and reading instruction language.Prerequisite or co-requisite: EDUC 3750 or PSY-PC 3130 [3]

EDUC3790 - Qualitative Language AnalysisThis Qualitative Language Analysis course introduces students to some of the characteristics and approaches to designing and conducting qualitative language research analysis. Students will gain experience in various qualitative analysis techniques for purposes of either carrying out a research project or designing courses and materials derived from the results of their analysis. Prerequisite: EDUC 3750. [3]

EDUC3850 - Independent Study in EducationSemi-independent study on selected topics in education. Consent of instructor required. May be repeated. [1-3]

EDUC3860 - Honors Research in EducationIndividual programs of reading on the conduct of research studies in education. May be repeated. Consent of instructor required. [1-3]

EDUC3861 - Initial Fieldwork in Educational StudiesField-based application of Education Studies coursework, providing students an opportunity to integrate and apply theory and practice to learning in out-of-school settings. Students are placed in culturally diverse education settings and are given opportunities to engage in practitioner observations, learning design and implementation, and guided reflective practice. [3]

EDUC3862 - Advanced Fieldwork in Educational StudiesAdvanced experience for Education Studies coursework, providing students an opportunity to developindependent experience in out-of-school settings and to apply at an advanced level theory and practice to learning in out-of-school settings. Students are placed in culturally diverse education settings and are given opportunities to engage in practitioner observations, learning design and implementation, and guided reflective practice. [3]

EDUC3871 - Practicum in Secondary Education IField experience in middle and secondary school settings. Designed for secondary education majors in their sophomore year. Corequisite: PSY-PC 2550 [1]

EDUC3872 - Practicum in Secondary Education IIField experience in middle and secondary school settings. Designed for secondary education majors in their junior year. [1]

EDUC3890 - Special Topics in EducationExploration of special issues on topics related to education. May be repeated for credit with change of topic. [1-3]

EDUC4950 - Capstone Fieldwork in Educational StudiesCapstone experience for Education Studies coursework, providing students an opportunity to developindependent experience in out-of-school settings and to apply at an advanced level theory and practice to learning in out-of-school settings. Students are placed in culturally diverse education settings and are given opportunities to engage in practitioner observations, learning design and implementation, and guided reflective practice. Capstone experiences should include opportunities for students to develop, direct or implement learning opportunities with increasing independence from field partners. [6]

EDUC4951 - Student Teaching in Early ChildhoodObservation and teaching experience for students seeking PreK-3 licensure. Undergraduate credit only.Prerequisite: admission to student teaching. [9]

EDUC4952 - Student Teaching in the Elementary SchoolObservation and teaching experience in elementary schools. Undergraduate credit only. Prerequisite: admission to student teaching. [9]

EDUC4953 - Student Teaching in the Secondary SchoolObservation and teaching experience in secondary schools. Undergraduate credit only. Prerequisite: admission to student teaching. [9]

EDUC4954 - Student Teaching in Education and Special Education(Also listed as SPED 4954) Observation, participation, and classroom teaching for undergraduate students in any area of education combined with any area of exceptionality. Placements are dependent on license andendorsement areas. Prerequisite: Admission to student teaching. [9]

EDUC4961 - Student Teaching Seminar: Early ChildhoodSeminar to accompany EDUC 4951. A $300.00 Teacher Performance Assessment fee is associated with this course. [3]

EDUC4962 - Student Teaching Seminar: ElementarySeminar to accompany EDUC 4952. A $300.00 Teacher Performance Assessment fee is associated with this course. [3]

ECE2112 - CircuitsDevelopment of basic electrical circuit element models, signal representations, and methods of circuit analysis.Matrix methods and computer techniques. Demonstrations of physical components, measurement techniques, and transient phenomena. Corequisite: MATH 2300; PHYS 1602. FALL, SPRING. [3]

ECE2112L - Circuits LaboratoryExperiments in electrical theory, circuits, and components, including linear circuit theorems, operational amplifiers, comparators, oscillators, multivibrators, data converters, diode circuits, transistors as digital switches, sensors and transducers, data transmission circuits, and first-order filters. Corequisite: ECE 2112.FALL, SPRING. [1]

ECE2123 - Digital Systems(Also listed as CS 2123). Digital systems and hardware fundamentals of computer architectures, from logic gates and sequential logic to simple processor (e.g. von Neumann) architectures. Boolean algebra, information representation, state machines, digital system design, processors, instruction execution, I/O handling, and machine instruction set concepts. ECE 2123 is not open to students who have earned credit for ECE 2116.Serves as repeat credit for CS 2123. Corequisite: ECE 2123L. FALL, SPRING [3].

ECE2123L - Digital Systems Laboratory(Also listed as CS 2123L). Laboratory for ECE 2123. One three-hour laboratory per week. ECE 2123L is not open to students who have earned credit for ECE 2116L. Serves as repeat credit for CS 2123L. Corequisite: ECE 2123.FALL, SPRING [1].

ECE2213 - Circuits IISteady-state and transient analysis of electrical networks with emphasis on Laplace transform methods and pole-zero concepts. Prerequisite: ECE 2112, PHYS 1602. Corequisite: ECE 2213L, MATH 2400 or 2420. FALL, SPRING. [3]

ECE2213L - Circuits II LaboratoryLaboratory for ECE 2213. One three-hour laboratory per week. Corequisite: ECE 2213. FALL, SPRING. [1]

ECE2214 - Analog Circuits and SystemsSteady-state and transient analysis of electrical networks with emphasis on Laplace and Fourier transform methods and pole-zero concepts. No credit for students who have earned credit for ECE 2213 or 3214.Prerequisite: ECE 2112, PHYS 1602. Corequisite: MATH 2400 or 2420. FALL, SPRING. [3]

ECE2218 - Microcontrollers(Also listed as CS 2218). Microprocessor and microcontroller architecture with emphasis on control applications.Assembly language and interfacing with programs written in high-level languages. Interfacing and real-time I/Owith microprocessors, control algorithms, and networking with microcontrollers. Serves as repeat credit for CS2218. Prerequisite: ECE 2116 or 2123; one of CS 1101, 1103, or 1104. Corequisite: ECE 2218L. SPRING. [3].

ECE2218L - Microcontrollers Laboratory(Also listed as CS 2218L). Laboratory for ECE 2218. A small structured project is required. One three-hour laboratory per week. Serves as repeat credit for CS 2218L. Corequisite: ECE 2218. SPRING. [1]

ECE2281 - Computer Architecture(Also listed as CS 2281). Introduction to computer architecture from a programmer’s perspective.Fundamentals: Boolean logic, combinational and sequential logic circuits, information representation in binary form. The von Neumann instruction set architecture, programmer’s model of a processor. Low-levelprogramming using the C language, and its mapping to machine instructions. Memory hierarchy andperformance issues. Input/output methods and advanced processors: multi-core, GPUs. ECE 2281 is not open for students who have earned credit for CS 2281 without permission. Serves as repeat credit for CS 2281.Prerequisite: CS 2201. Corequisite: ECE 2281L. FALL, SPRING [3].

ECE2281L - Computer Architecture Laboratory(Also listed as CS 2281L). Laboratory for ECE 2281. One three-hour laboratory per week. ECE 2281L is not open for students who have earned credit for CS 2281L without permission. Serves as repeat credit for CS 2281L.Corequisite: ECE 2281. FALL, SPRING [1].

ECE2860 - Introduction to Undergraduate ResearchIntroduction to undergraduate research under the direction of ECE faculty. Students in the School of Engineering may only receive open elective credit for ECE 2860. [1-3].

ECE3214 - Signals and SystemsFundamental signals, systems, and linear algebra concepts necessary for the study of communications and control systems. Includes continuous-time and discrete-time signal and system concepts, Fourier analysis in both continuous and discrete-time, Z-transform, and the FFT. Prerequisite: ECE 2112. FALL, SPRING. [3]

ECE3233 - ElectromagneticsElectromagnetic field theory. Maxwell's equations from a historical approach. Electromagnetic waves with regard to various media and boundary conditions. Prerequisite: PHYS 1602. Corequisite: MATH 2400 or 2420.FALL. [3]

ECE3235 - Electronics ISemiconductor devices and electronic circuits. Diodes, BJT and MOS transistors. Device models, modes of operation, biasing. Small-signal models, low-frequency analysis of single- and multi-stage analog amplifiers, simple amplifier design. Large signal models, dc analysis of digital circuits. Prerequisite: ECE 2112. Corequisite: ECE 3235L. FALL. [3]

ECE3235L - Electronics I LaboratoryLaboratory for ECE 3235. One three-hour laboratory per week. Corequisite: ECE 3235. FALL. [1]

ECE3860 - Undergraduate ResearchSupervised projects in electrical engineering, computer engineering, or related fields. Consent of instructor required. No more than 6 hours of ECE 3860 and 3861 may be applied toward graduation. [1-3]

ECE3861 - Undergraduate ResearchSupervised projects in electrical engineering, computer engineering, or related fields. Consent of instructor required. No more than 6 hours of ECE 3860 and 3861 may be applied toward graduation. [1-3]

ECE3891 - Special Topics[1-3 each semester]

ECE3892 - Special Topics[1-3 each semester]

ECE4239 - Cyber-Physical Systems: Foundations and Project(Also listed as CS 4239). Foundations of cyber-physical systems and the Internet-of-Things. Model-based engineering of cyber-physical systems, including modeling of physical and computational systems, design and implementation techniques, analysis and verification. Includes modeling and analysis assignments, and project using a simulator and a real-time computer system. Serves as repeat credit for CS 4239. Prerequisite: CS 3281or ECE 4375 or CS 4375; MATH 2300 or 2500; MATH 2410 or 2501 or 2600. SPRING. [3]

ECE4252 - Signal Processing and CommunicationsAM and FM modulation. Advanced topics in signal processing. Prerequisite: ECE 3214 or 4356. SPRING. [3]

ECE4257 - Control Systems ITheory and design of feedback control systems, steady-state and transient analysis, stability considerations.Model representation. State-variable models. Prerequisite: ECE 2213, 2214, or 3214. FALL. [3]

ECE4267 - Power System AnalysisAnalysis of large transmission and distribution networks. Analysis of power lines, load flow, short circuit studies, economic operation, and stability. Prerequisite: ECE 2213 or 2214. [3]

ECE4268 - Distributed Electrical Energy SystemsUses of photovoltaics and wind as well as micro-hydro, fuel cells, and geothermal for producing electricity.Comparison with traditional generating methods based on the prime movers (steam, gas, etc.) and types (primarily three-phase) of electrical generators used. The economics of stand-alone and grid connected systems are covered. Prerequisite: ECE 2112. [3]

ECE4275 - Microelectronic SystemsActive devices in the context of digital systems, with an emphasis on embedded systems integration.Characteristics and utilization of different digital integrated circuit families, common bus structures and protocols and real-world interfaces (comparators, A/D/A conversion). Prerequisite: ECE 2112; ECE 2116 or ECE2123. SPRING. [3]

ECE4283 - Principles and Models of Semiconductor DevicesPhysical principles of operation of the p-n junction, MOS field-effect transistor, and bipolar transistor.Fundamentals of charge transport, charge storage, and generation-recombination; application to the operation of MOSFET and BJT. Device modeling with emphasis on features and constraints of integrated circuittechnologies. Prerequisite: ECE 3235. [3]

ECE4284 - Integrated Circuit Technology and FabricationMonolithic integrated circuit technology. Basic semiconductor properties and processes that result in modern integrated circuit. Bipolar and MOSFET processes and structures. Fabrication, design, layout, and applications as regards semiconductor microelectronic technologies. Prerequisite: ECE 3235. SPRING. [3]

ECE4286 - Audio EngineeringEngineering aspects of high fidelity sound reproduction, with emphasis on digital audio and loudspeakers.Analog-to-digital and digital-to-analog conversion, data storage, perceptual coding, loudspeaker design.Prerequisite: ECE 2213 or 2214; ECE 3235. [3]

ECE4287 - Engineering ReliabilityTopics in engineering reliability with emphasis on electrical devices and systems. Reliability concepts and models. Risk analysis. Lifetime evaluation. System examples. Prerequisite: ECE 3235 or ECE 4275. [3]

ECE4288 - OptoelectronicsFundamentals and applications of light generation, propagation, and modulation in passive and active optoelectronic components. Waveguides, lasers, electro-optic modulators, and emerging optoelectronic technology for optical communication, computing, and sensing applications. Prerequisite: ECE 3233 or equivalent. SPRING. [3]

ECE4289 - Spacecraft SystemsSpacecraft electrical and electronic subsystems with emphasis on practical limitations and hazards in space.Analysis of environments, mechanisms of failure, and implications for design. Prerequisite: ECE 3235 or 4275.SPRING. [3]

ECE4334 - RF and Microwave DesignModeling of components and transmission structures at RF and microwave frequencies (30 MHz to 30 GHz), with emphasis on the effects of materials and geometry on passive structures for filtering and impedance matching.Modeling and design of active circuits and components such as RF amplifiers with input and output impedance matching structures. Prereq: ECE 3233. SPRING. [3]

ECE4335 - Fundamentals of Quantum EngineeringOverview of quantum effects in microelectronics and introduction to quantum computing. The needs,opportunities, and challenges of extending current computing paradigms to quantum-enhancedmicroelectronics technologies are discussed. Students are introduced to basis states of quantum systems and principles of superposition and entanglement, qubits, and basic algorithms relevant to quantum computing.Practical implementations of quantum computing are illustrated. A student project on current developments in quantum computing is required. Prerequisites: One of PHYS 1602, 1912, or 2255. SPRING. [3]

ECE4353 - Image ProcessingDigital imaging and computational photography. Image formation. Point processing. Color perception and manipulation. Spatial filtering via convolution. 2D Fourier transforms. Frequency-domain filtering. Intensity quantization. High dynamic range imaging. Resampling for image resizing, rotation, and warping. Image compositing. Panorama generation. Noise reduction. Mathematical morphology. Image compression. Three lectures and one three-hour virtual laboratory. Prerequisite: CS 1101 or 1104; MATH 2400, 2410, 2501, or 2600.FALL. [4]

ECE4354 - Computer VisionComputational processes. Python and OpenCV for real-time processing. Feature detection: edges, corners, and oriented histogram methods. Feature matching. Scale space. Projective geometry. Camera models. Stereopsis.Image rectification. Multi-baseline stereo. Motion estimation. 3D reconstruction. Machine learning for computer vision including multilayer neural networks. Prerequisite: ECE 4353. SPRING. [3]

ECE4356 - Digital Signal ProcessingDiscrete-time signals and systems. Applications of Digital Signal Processing (DSP) sampling, digital filtering, FFTs, etc. Three lectures and one laboratory period. Prerequisite: MATH 2300. SPRING. [4]

ECE4358 - Control Systems IIModern control design. Discrete-time analysis. Analysis and design of digital control systems. Nonlinear systems and optimum control systems. Fuzzy control systems. Two lectures and one laboratory. Prerequisite: ECE 4257.SPRING. [3]

ECE4363 - Applied Statistical Machine LearningApplication of mathematical techniques that form the foundation of machine learning and artificial intelligence.Probability and statistics, applications of Bayes theorem, matrix analysis, LMS and maximum likelihood estimation. Classification techniques, linear and basis function regressions. Estimation and sampling of probability distributions. Data partitioning and n-fold cross-validation. Recursive Bayesian estimation. Methods of dimensionality reduction. The perceptron, kernel methods, support vector machines, and Gaussian processes.Prerequisite: One of MATH 2810, MATH 2820, or BME 2400. FALL. [3]

ECE4371 - Mobile and Wireless NetworksDesign, development, and applications of mobile applications and services. Topics include wireless technologies, smart phone programming, cloud computing services. Course not open to students who have earned credit for CS 4283 without permission. Serves as repeat credit for CS 4283. Prerequisite: CS 2201 or equivalent programming experience. [3]

ECE4375 - Embedded Systems(Also listed as CS 4375). Design and implementation of embedded computer-based systems. Programming for real-time systems and the Internet of Things. Embedded system modeling, design, analysis, and implementation using real-time and event-driven techniques. A structured project is required. Serves as repeat credit for CS4375. Prerequisite: ECE 2218, CS 2201. Corequisite: ECE 4375L. FALL. [3]

ECE4375L - Embedded Systems Laboratory(Also listed as CS 4375L). Design and implementation of embedded computer-based systems. Programming for real-time systems and the Internet of Things. Embedded system modeling, design, analysis, and implementation using real-time and event-driven techniques. A structured project is required. Serves as repeat credit for CS4375L. Prerequisite: ECE 2218, CS 2201. Corequisite: ECE 4375. FALL. [1]

ECE4377 - FPGA DesignDesign and applications of field-programmable gate arrays, Electronic Design Automation (EDA) tools for design, placement, and routing. Hardware description languages. Implementation of designs on prototype FPGA board.Prerequisite: ECE 2116 or 2123. [3]

ECE4380 - Electronics IIIntegrated circuit analysis and design. High frequency operation of semiconductor devices. Frequency-response and feedback analysis of BJT and MOS analog amplifier circuits, multi-stage frequency-compensated amplifier design. Transient analysis of BJT and MOS digital circuit families. Digital-to-analog and analog-to-digital conversion circuits. Prerequisite: ECE 2213 or 2214; ECE 3235. SPRING. [3]

ECE4385 - VLSI DesignIntegrated circuit and fabrication techniques; CAD tools for design, layout, and verification; parasitic elements and their effects on circuit performance; system-level design experience is gained by completing design and layout phases of a project. Prerequisite: ECE 2116 or ECE 2123; ECE 3235. FALL. [3]

ECE4950 - Program and Project Management for ECEMethods for planning programs and projects. Organization structures and information management for project teams. Communications between project teams and clients, government agencies, and others. Motivational factors and conflict resolution. Budget/schedule control. Similar to ENGM 3700, but preparatory to the ECEsenior design project course, ECE 4951. Credit given for only one of ENGM 3700, CE 4400 or ECE 4950.Prerequisite: senior standing. Corequisite: ECE 4959. FALL. [3]

ECE4951 - Electrical and Computer Engineering DesignBased on product specifications typically supplied by industrial sponsors, teams of students responsible for the formulation, execution, qualification, and documentation of a culminating engineering design. The application of knowledge acquired from earlier coursework, both within and outside the major area, along with realistic technical, managerial, and budgetary constraints using standard systems engineering methodologies and practices. Prerequisite: ECE 4950, at least one DE course, senior standing. SPRING. [3]

ECE4959 - Senior Engineering Design SeminarElements of professional engineering practice. Professionalism, licensing, ethics and ethical issues, intellectual property, contracts, liability, risk, reliability and safety, interdisciplinary teams and team tools, codes, standards, professional organizations, careers, entrepreneurship, human factors, and industrial design. Prerequisite: senior standing. Corequisite: ECE 4950. FALL. [1]

ENGM2160 - Engineering EconomyEconomic evaluation and comparison of alternatives: interest, periodic payments, depreciation, criteria, and analytical procedures in investment decision-making, and cost-estimating. FALL, SPRING. [3]

ENGM2210 - Technology StrategyCritical issues faced by chief technology officers. Assessment of technological capabilities and opportunities, formulation of a technical plan for the product portfolio and commercialization, management of intellectual property, and economic analysis. Prerequisite: Sophomore standing. FALL, SPRING. [3]

ENGM2440 - Applied Behavioral ScienceLeadership styles, power team building, conflict resolution, management resolution, interviewing techniques.Prerequisite: sophomore standing. FALL, SPRING, SUMMER. [3]

ENGM3000 - Enterprise System DesignDesign of complex enterprise systems and processes including enterprise requirements analysis, process-mapping, modeling, performance measurement, benchmarking, solution development, and changemanagement. Prerequisite: ENGM 2210 or BUS 2700, junior standing. FALL, SPRING. [3]

ENGM3010 - Systems EngineeringFundamental considerations associated with the engineering of large-scale systems. Models and methods for systems engineering and problem solving using a systems engineering approach. Prerequisite: ENGM 2210, junior standing. FALL, SPRING. [3]

ENGM3100 - Finance and Accounting for EngineersTime value of money, capital budgeting and formation, financial accounting and reporting, double entry bookkeeping, taxation, performance ratio measurements, and working capital management. Probabilistic models for expected net present value and rate of return, dividend pricing models for alternative growth scenarios, cost and market based models for average cost of capital, taxation algorithms, and regression analysis for individual firm betas. Prerequisite: Junior standing. FALL, SPRING, SUMMER. [3]

ENGM3200 - Technology MarketingStrategies for marketing technology-based products and services. Demand analysis, segmentation, distribution, and personal selling. Economic analysis from inception to end use. Prerequisite: ENGM 2210 or BUS 1600, junior standing. FALL. [3]

ENGM3300 - Technology Assessment and ForecastingMethods of forecasting technological advancements and assessing their potential intended and unintended consequences. Delphi method, trend exploration, environmental monitoring, and scenario development.Prerequisite: Junior standing. SPRING. [3]

ENGM3350 - Organizational BehaviorStudy of the factors that impact how individuals and groups interact and behave within organizations, and how organizations respond to their environment. Motivation theory, communication within organizations, group dynamics, conflict management, decision making, power, strategic planning, organizational culture, and change. Focus on utilizing analytical tools to understand organizations: symbolic, political, human resources, and structural. Prerequisite: ENGM 2440. [3]

ENGM3600 - Technology-Based EntrepreneurshipIdentification and evaluation of opportunities: risks faced by entrepreneurs, market assessment, capital requirements, venture capital acquisition, legal structures, tax implications for sharing technology-based businesses. Prerequisite: junior standing. FALL. [3]

ENGM3650 - Operations and Supply Chain ManagementManufacturing strategy, process analysis, product and process design, total quality management, capacity planning, inventory control, supply chain design, and advanced operations topics. Modeling and analysis using cases and spreadsheets. Prerequisite: MATH 1301 or BUS 1700, junior standing. FALL. [3]

ENGM3700 - Program and Project ManagementScheduling, cost estimation/predictions, network analysis, optimization, resource/load leveling, risk/mitigation, quality/testing, international projects. Term project required. Provides validated preparation for the Project Management Institute CAPM certification for undergraduates or the PMP for graduate students. Credit given for only one of ENGM 3700, CE 4400, or EECE 4950. Prerequisite: MATH 1301 or BUS 1700, junior standing. FALL, SPRING, SUMMER. [3]

ENGM3850 - Independent StudyReadings or projects on topics in engineering management under the supervision of the ENGM faculty. Consent of instructor required. [1-3 each semester, not to exceed a total of 3].

ENGM3851 - Independent StudyReadings or projects on topics in engineering management under the supervision of the ENGM faculty. Consent of instructor required. [1-3 each semester, not to exceed a total of 3]

ENGM3890 - Special TopicsVariable credit, 1-3 each semester. [1-3]

ENGM3891 - Special Topics[Variable credit: 1-3 each semester]

ENGM4500 - Product DevelopmentProject-based course focused on the methods for managing the design, development, and commercialization of new products. Generating product concepts, developing a prototype strategy, modeling financial returns, securing intellectual property, designing retail packaging, and performing market testing to establish an optimal price. Teams include Engineering and MBA students. Prerequisite: ENGM 2210; ENGM 3700 or CE 4400 or EECE4950; junior standing. SPRING. [4]

ENGM4800 - Wealth Management for EngineersFoundations of financial planning; managing basic assets, credit, and insurance needs; employee incentive plans such as stock options, deferred compensation and severance; managing investments in stocks, bonds, mutual funds, and real estate; retirement and estate planning such as 401k, 403b, IRA, Roth, estatepreservation. Students in the School of Engineering may only receive open elective credit for ENGM 4800.SPRING [1]

ENGM4951 - Engineering Management Capstone ProjectApplication of engineering management concepts through team projects sponsored by faculty or seed-stage technology companies. Thinking, analysis, and planning processes needed to commercialize a concept and develop a business plan for presentation to investors. Prerequisite: ENGM 2210; ENGM 3000 or 3010.Corequisite: ENGM 3700. SPRING. [3]

ES1001 - Engineering Commons iSeminarTopics vary. Open elective credit only. [1]

ES1115 - First-year Engineering SeminarFirst-year Engineering Seminar. [1]

ES1401 - Introduction to Engineering, Module1First of three required discipline-specific modules for Introduction to Engineering credit providing an introduction to engineering analysis and design. Discipline-specific modules selected based on individual choice. Students choose three different disciplines for the three modules and all three must be completed in one semester for full course credit. Emphasis is on contemporary engineering problem solving in a discipline-specific context. FALL.[1]

ES1402 - Introduction to Engineering, Module 2Continuation of ES 1401. ES 1401-1403 must be completed in one semester for full course credit. FALL. [1]

ES1403 - Introduction to Engineering, Module 3Continuation of ES 1402. ES 1401-1403 must be completed in one semester for full course credit. FALL. [1]

ES2100W - Technical CommunicationsInstruction and practice in written and oral communication. Emphasis is on organization and presentation of information to a specific audience for a specific purpose. Course includes writing and editing reports of various lengths, preparing and using visual aids, and presenting oral reports. Prerequisite: Sophomore standing. FALL, SPRING. [3]

ES2700 - Engineering Career DevelopmentA practical course designed to help students succeed in the job/internship search and career development.Interviewing, networking, online tools, elevator pitch, career fair strategies, career center resources, company research techniques, resumes, cover letters, negotiating, follow-up messages. FALL [1]

ES2900 - Engineering and Public PolicyRole of federal policy in supporting and promoting engineering and science for the benefit of the U.S. Ways engineering, science and public policy impact each other. Federal government involvement, policy making, federal budget, role of universities and national labs, national defense, homeland security, biomedical enterprise. SPRING [3]

ES3230 - Ships Engineering SystemsShip characteristics and types, including design and control, propulsion, hydrodynamic forces, stability, compartmentation, and electrical and auxiliary systems. Theory and design of steam, gas turbine, and nuclear propulsion. FALL. [3]

ES3231 - NavigationNaval piloting procedures. Charts, visual and electronic aids, and theory and operation of magnetic and gyro compasses; inland and international rules of the nautical road. The celestial coordinate system, including spherical trigonometry and application for navigation at sea. Environmental influences on naval operations.SPRING. [3]

ES3232 - Ships Weapons SystemsTheory and employment of weapons systems, including the processes of detection, evaluation, threat analysis, weapon selection, delivery, guidance, and explosives. Fire control systems and major weapons types, including capabilities and limitations. Physical aspects of radar and underwater sound. Command, control, andcommunications and means of weapons system integration. SPRING. [3]

ES3233 - Naval OperationsMethods of tracking and intercepting at sea. Maritime maneuvering problems, formation tactics, and shipboard operations. Naval communications, ship behavior and maneuvering, and applied aspects of ship handling.Prerequisite: ES 3231. FALL. [3]

ES3300 - Energy and Sustainability - An Engineering ApproachUses basic understanding of mechanics, thermodynamics, and electrodynamics to describe primary andsecondary energy generation and use. Emphasis on current applications, energy efficiency at both the source and demand sides, and future (near and long-term) energy scenarios. Various economic models are explored.Prerequisite: junior or senior standing. [3]

ES3860 - Undergraduate ResearchIndependent study under the direction of a faculty member with expertise in the area of study. [1-3 each semester]

ES3884 - InternshipInternship credit for work approved by the Associate Dean of the School of Engineering. A written scholarly project must be produced in the internship. Course must be taken P/F. May be repeated for credit; maximum of total 4 hours. No more than 2 hours may count toward degree requirements. FALL, SPRING, SUMMER. [1]

ES3890 - Special TopicsTechnical elective courses of special current interest. No more than six semester hours of these courses may be credited to the student's record. Prerequisite: consent of instructor. FALL, SPRING. [1-3]

ES4951 - Senior Capstone ExperienceBased on project specifications typically supplied by industrial sponsors or part of a student's immersive experience. Students are responsible for the formulation, execution, qualification, and documentation of a culminating capstone experience. Application of knowledge acquired from earlier coursework, both within and outside the engineering core area, along with realistic technical, managerial, and budgetary constraints using standard systems engineering methodologies and practices. Prerequisite: Senior standing. Corequisite: ENGM3700. SPRING. [3]

ES4959 - Senior Engineering Design SeminarElements of professional engineering practice. Professionalism, licensing, ethics and ethical issues, intellectual property, contracts, liability, risk, reliability and safety, interdisciplinary teams and team tools, codes, standards, professional organizations, careers, entrepreneurship, human factors, and industrial design. Prerequisite: Senior standing. FALL. [1]

ENGL1001 - Commons iSeminarTopics vary. General Elective credit only. [1] (No AXLE credit)

ENGL1100 - CompositionFor students who need to improve their writing. Emphasis on writing skills, with some analysis of modern nonfiction writing. [3] (No AXLE credit)

ENGL1101 - Creative Writing Tutorial: FictionIndividual instruction in writing fiction. Offered on a pass/fail basis only. Not open to students who have earned credit for ENGL 3851 section 07 without permission. Total credit hours for this course and ENGL 3851 section 7will not exceed 1 credit hour. Credit hours reduced from most recent course taken (or from test or transfer credit) as appropriate. [1] (No AXLE credit)

ENGL1102 - Creative Writing Tutorial: PoetryIndividual instruction in writing poetry. Offered on a pass/fail basis only. Not open to students who have earned credit for ENGL 3851 section 07 without permission. Total credit hours for this course and ENGL 3851 section 7will not exceed 1 credit hour. Credit hours reduced from most recent course taken (or from test or transfer credit) as appropriate. [1] (No AXLE credit)

ENGL1111 - First-Year Writing SeminarIndependent learning and inquiry in an environment in which students can express knowledge and defend opinions through intensive class discussion, oral presentations, and written expression. May be repeated for credit once if there is no duplication of topic, but students may earn only up to 3 credits in any 1111 course per semester of enrollment. [3; maximum of 6 credits total for all semesters of 1111] (AXLE credit category varies by section)

ENGL1210W - Prose Fiction: Forms and TechniquesClose study of short stories and novels and written explication of these forms. [3] (HCA)

ENGL1220W - Drama: Forms and TechniquesClose study of representative plays of the major periods and of the main formal categories (tragedy, comedy) and written explication of these forms. [3] (HCA)

ENGL1230W - Literature and Analytical ThinkingClose reading and writing in a variety of genres drawn from several periods. Productive dialogue, persuasive argument, and effective prose style. Offered on a graded basis only. [3] (HCA)

ENGL1240 - Beginning Nonfiction WorkshopWriting various forms of prose nonfiction. [3] (HCA)

ENGL1250W - Introduction to PoetryClose study and criticism of poems. The nature of poetry, and the process of literary explication. [3] (HCA) ENGL1260W - Introduction to Literary and Cultural Analysis

Close study and criticism of poems. The nature of poetry, and the process of literary explication. [3] (HCA) ENGL1260W - Introduction to Literary and Cultural AnalysisAnalysis of a range of texts in social, political, and aesthetic contexts. Interdisciplinary study of cultural forms as diverse as poetry, advertisement, and film. [3] (HCA)

ENGL1270W - Introduction to Literary CriticismSelected critical approaches to literature. [3] (HCA)

ENGL1280 - Beginning Fiction WorkshopIntroduction to the art of writing prose fiction. [3] (HCA)

ENGL1290 - Beginning Poetry WorkshopIntroduction to the art of writing poetry. [3] (HCA)

ENGL1300W - Intermediate CompositionA writing course including the analysis of essays from a variety of disciplines. [3] (HCA)

ENGL2200 - Foundations of Literary StudyFundamentals of literary study: close reading; analytic writing; historical context; abstract reasoning in theory; creative expression. [3] (HCA)

ENGL2310 - Representative British WritersSelections from British literature with attention to contexts and literary periods. From the beginnings to 1660.Provides a broad background for more specialized courses and is especially useful for students considering advanced studies in literature. [3] (HCA)

ENGL2311 - Representative British WritersSelections from British literature with attention to contexts and literary periods. From 1660 to the present.Provides a broad background for more specialized courses and is especially useful for students considering advanced studies in literature. [3] (HCA)

ENGL2316 - Representative American WritersSelections from the entire body of American literature with attention to contexts and literary periods. Provides a broad background for more specialized courses and is especially useful for students considering advanced studies in literature. Repeat credit for students who have completed 2316W. [3] (US)

ENGL2316W - Representative American WritersSelections from the entire body of American literature with attention to contexts and literary periods. Provides a broad background for more specialized courses and is especially useful for students considering advanced studies in literature. Repeat credit for students who have completed 2316. [3] (US)

ENGL2318 - World Literature, ClassicalGreat Books from the points of view of literary expression and changing ideologies: Classical Greece through the Renaissance. Repeat credit for students who have completed 2318W. [3] (HCA)

ENGL2318W - World Literature, ClassicalGreat Books from the points of view of literary expression and changing ideologies: Classical Greece through the Renaissance. Repeat credit for students who have completed 2318. [3] (HCA)

ENGL2319 - World Literature, ModernGreat Books from the points of view of literary expression and changing ideologies: The 17th century to the contemporary period. Repeat credit for students who have completed 2319W. [3] (HCA)

ENGL2319W - World Literature, ModernGreat Books from the points of view of literary expression and changing ideologies: The 17th century to the contemporary period. Repeat credit for students who have completed 2319. [3] (HCA)

ENGL2320 - Southern LiteratureThe works of Southern writers from Captain Smith to the present. Topics such as the Plantation Myth, slavery and civil war, Agrarianism, and "post-southernism." Authors may include Poe, Twain, Cable, Faulkner, Welty, Percy, Wright. [3] (HCA)

ENGL2330 - Introduction to Environmental HumanitiesInterdisciplinary study of human beings' relationship to the environment. Literary, artistic, historical, and philosophical perspectives. Cultural understandings of the environment. [3] (HCA)

ENGL2330W - Introduction to Environmental HumanitiesInterdisciplinary study of human beings' relationship to the environment. Literary, artistic, historical, and philosophical perspectives. Cultural understandings of the environment. [3] (HCA)

ENGL2740 - Topics in Literature and PhilosophyLiterary, philosophical, and cultural texts on varied philosophical topics. May be repeated for credit if there is no duplication in topic. Students may enroll in more than one section of this course per semester. [3] (HCA) ENGL2740W - Topics in Literature and Philosophy

Literary, philosophical, and cultural texts on varied philosophical topics. May be repeated for credit if there is no duplication in topic. Students may enroll in more than one section of this course per semester. [3] (HCA) ENGL2740W - Topics in Literature and PhilosophyLiterary, philosophical, and cultural texts on varied philosophical topics. May be repeated for credit if there is no duplication in topic. Students may enroll in more than one section of this course per semester. [3] (HCA) ENGL3210 - Intermediate Nonfiction Writing

Literary, philosophical, and cultural texts on varied philosophical topics. May be repeated for credit if there is no duplication in topic. Students may enroll in more than one section of this course per semester. [3] (HCA) ENGL3210 - Intermediate Nonfiction WritingInstruction in the forms and techniques of nonfiction writing. Admission by consent of instructor. May be repeated once for credit. [3] (HCA)

ENGL3215 - The Art of BloggingConventions of the rapidly evolving literary form of blogging. Creation and maintenance of a personal blog.Critique of online journalism across many genres, including activism, politics, science, and arts and culture.Interaction with professional bloggers. [3] (HCA)

ENGL3215W - The Art of BloggingConventions of the rapidly evolving literary form of blogging. Creation and maintenance of a personal blog.Critique of online journalism across many genres, including activism, politics, science, and arts and culture.Interaction with professional bloggers. Serves as repeat credit for students who have completed 3215. [3] (HCA) ENGL3220 - Advanced Nonfiction Writing

Interaction with professional bloggers. Serves as repeat credit for students who have completed 3215. [3] (HCA) ENGL3220 - Advanced Nonfiction WritingFurther instruction in the form and techniques of nonfiction writing. Admission by consent of instructor. May be repeated for credit once if there is no duplication in topic. Students may enroll in more than one section of this course per semester. [3; maximum of 6 credits total for all semesters of ENGL 3220] (HCA)

ENGL3230 - Intermediate Fiction WorkshopInstruction in fiction writing. Supplementary readings that illustrate traditional aspects of prose fiction.Admission by consent of instructor. May be repeated for credit once if there is no duplication in topic. Students may enroll in more than one section of this course per semester. [3; maximum of 6 credits total for all semesters of ENGL 3230] (HCA)

ENGL3240 - Advanced Fiction WorkshopContinuing instruction in fiction writing. Admission by consent of instructor. May be repeated for credit once if there is no duplication in topic. Students may enroll in more than one section of this course per semester. [3; maximum of 6 credits total for all semesters of ENGL 3240] (HCA)

ENGL3250 - Intermediate Poetry WorkshopInstruction in poetry writing. Supplementary readings illustrating traditional aspects of poetry. Admission by consent of instructor. May be repeated for credit once if there is no duplication in topic. Students may enroll in more than one section of this course per semester. [3; maximum of 6 credits total for all semesters of ENGL

ENGL3260 - Advanced Poetry WorkshopContinuing instruction in poetry writing. Admission by consent of instructor. May be repeated for credit once if there is no duplication in topic. Students may enroll in more than one section of this course per semester. [3; maximum of 6 credits total for all semesters of ENGL 3260] (HCA)

ENGL3280 - Literature and the Craft of WritingThe forms and techniques of creative writing. Contemporary practices in fiction and poetry in historical context.[3] (HCA)

ENGL3310 - Anglo-Saxon Language and LiteratureThe study of the Old English language. Selected historical and literary prose. Short heroic poems. [3] (HCA) ENGL3312 - The Medieval World

The study of the Old English language. Selected historical and literary prose. Short heroic poems. [3] (HCA) ENGL3312 - The Medieval WorldEnglish literature and culture in relation to Europe, the Middle East, and Asia. Cross-cultural exchange, national and religious identity, and race. Not open to students who have completed ENGL 3316. Serves as repeat credit for ENGL 3312W. [3] (P)

ENGL3312W - The Medieval WorldEnglish literature and culture in relation to Europe, the Middle East, and Asia. Cross-cultural exchange, national and religious identity, and race. Not open to students who have completed ENGL 3316. Serves as repeat credit for ENGL 3312. [3] (P)

ENGL3314 - ChaucerStudy of The Canterbury Tales and Chaucer's world. [3] (HCA)

ENGL3316 - Medieval LiteratureThe drama, lyrics, romance, allegory, and satire of the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries, studied in the context of the period's intellectual climate and social change. [3] (HCA)

ENGL3318 - The History of the English LanguageThe development of English syntax. History of the English vocabulary: word formation, borrowing, semantic change, and meter. [3] (HCA)

ENGL3330 - Sixteenth CenturyProse and poetry of the sixteenth century. Emphasis on Spenser and his contemporaries. [3] (HCA)

ENGL3332 - English Renaissance: The DramaEnglish drama, exclusive of Shakespeare, from 1550-1642: Marlowe, Jonson, Webster, and others. Serves as repeat credit for ENGL 3332W. [3] (HCA)

ENGL3332W - English Renaissance: The DramaEnglish drama, exclusive of Shakespeare, from 1550-1642: Marlowe, Jonson, Webster, and others. Serves as repeat credit for 3332. [3] (HCA)

ENGL3333 - Special Offerings OnlineTopics vary by section and instructor. May be repeated for credit; students may register for more than one section of this course in the same semester. [3]

ENGL3335 - English Renaissance PoetryDevelopment of the English poetic tradition from 1500-1700. Repeat credit for students who have earned credit for 3335W. [3] (HCA)

ENGL3335W - English Renaissance PoetryDevelopment of the English poetic tradition from 1500-1700. Repeat credit for students who have earned credit for 3335. [3] (HCA)

ENGL3336 - Shakespeare: Comedies and HistoriesAbout twenty of the major plays considered in chronological order over two terms, with emphasis onShakespeare's development as a dramatic artist. Primarily comedies and histories. Serves as repeat credit for ENGL 3336W. [3] (HCA)

ENGL3336W - Shakespeare: Comedies and HistoriesAbout twenty of the major plays considered in chronological order over two terms, with emphasis onShakespeare's development as a dramatic artist. Primarily comedies and histories. Serves as repeat credit for ENGL 3336. [3] (HCA)

ENGL3337 - Shakespeare: Tragedies and RomancesAbout twenty of the major plays considered in chronological order over two terms, with emphasis onShakespeare's development as a dramatic artist. Primarily tragedies and romances. [3] (HCA)

ENGL3337W - Shakespeare: Tragedies and RomancesAbout twenty of the major plays considered in chronological order over two terms, with emphasis onShakespeare's development as a dramatic artist. Primarily tragedies and romances. Serves as repeat credit for ENGL 3337. [3] (HCA)

ENGL3340 - Shakespeare: Representative SelectionsA representative selection of plays, including histories, tragedies, comedies, and romances, designed to give the student a sense of the full range of Shakespeare's work in one semester. Repeat credit for students who have completed 3340W. [3] (HCA)

ENGL3340W - Shakespeare: Representative SelectionsA representative selection of plays, including histories, tragedies, comedies, and romances, designed to give the student a sense of the full range of Shakespeare's work in one semester. Repeat credit for students who have completed 3340. [3] (HCA)

ENGL3343 - Race and Early ModernityDrama, poetry, and prose from the 16th-17th centuries. Questions of race in conjunction with modern literary and theoretical works. [3] (HCA)

ENGL3346 - Seventeenth-Century LiteraturePoetry and prose from 1600 to the English Civil War, such as Metaphysical and Cavalier poetry, essays, romances, and satires. Authors may include Bacon, Cavendish, Donne, Herbert, Jonson, Lanier, Marvell, and Wroth. [3] (HCA)

ENGL3346W - Seventeenth-Century LiteraturePoetry and prose from 1600 to the English Civil War, such as Metaphysical and Cavalier poetry, essays, romances, and satires. Authors may include Bacon, Cavendish, Donne, Herbert, Jonson, Lanier, Marvell, and Wroth. Serves as repeat credit for 3346. [3] (HCA)

ENGL3348 - MiltonThe early English poems; Paradise Lost, Paradise Regained, and Samson Agonistes; the major prose. Serves as repeat credit for ENGL 3348W. [3] (HCA)

ENGL3348W - MiltonThe early English poems; Paradise Lost, Paradise Regained, and Samson Agonistes; the major prose. Serves as repeat credit for ENGL 3348. [3] (HCA)

ENGL3360 - Restoration and the Eighteenth CenturyExplorations of the aesthetic and social world of letters from the English Civil War to the French Revolution.Drama, poetry, and prose, including Restoration plays, political poetry, satire, travel narratives, and tales.Authors may include Behn, Dryden, Congreve, Addison, Swift, Finch, Pope, Fielding, Burney, Johnson, and Inchbald. Earlier writers. [3] (HCA)

ENGL3360W - Restoration and the Eighteenth CenturyExplorations of the aesthetic and social world of letters from the English Civil War to the French Revolution.Drama, poetry, and prose, including Restoration plays, political poetry, satire, travel narratives, and tales.Authors may include Behn, Dryden, Congreve, Addison, Swift, Finch, Pope, Fielding, Burney, Johnson, and Inchbald. Earlier writers. Serves as repeat credit for 3360. [3] (HCA)

ENGL3361 - Restoration and the Eighteenth CenturyExplorations of the aesthetic and social world of letters from the English Civil War to the French Revolution.Drama, poetry, and prose, including Restoration plays, political poetry, satire, travel narratives, and tales.Authors may include Behn, Dryden, Congreve, Addison, Swift, Finch, Pope, Fielding, Burney, Johnson, and Inchbald. Later writers. [3] (HCA)

ENGL3361W - Restoration and the Eighteenth CenturyExplorations of the aesthetic and social world of letters from the English Civil War to the French Revolution.Drama, poetry, and prose, including Restoration plays, political poetry, satire, travel narratives, and tales.Authors may include Behn, Dryden, Congreve, Addison, Swift, Finch, Pope, Fielding, Burney, Johnson, and Inchbald. Later writers. Serves as repeat credit for 3361. [3] (HCA)

ENGL3364 - The Eighteenth-Century English NovelENGL3364W - The Eighteenth-Century English NovelCourse DescriptionThe English novel from its beginning through Jane Austen. Development of the novel as a literary form, and study of selected works of Defoe, Richardson, Fielding, Sterne, and other novelists of the period. Serves as repeat credit for 3364.[3] (HCA)

ENGL3364W - The Eighteenth-Century English NovelThe English novel from its beginning through Jane Austen. Development of the novel as a literary form, and study of selected works of Defoe, Richardson, Fielding, Sterne, and other novelists of the period. Serves as repeat credit for 3364.[3] (HCA)

ENGL3370 - The Bible in LiteratureAn examination of ways in which the Bible and biblical imagery have functioned in literature and fine arts, in both "high culture" and popular culture, from Old English poems to modern poetry, drama, fiction, cartoons, and political rhetoric. Readings include influential biblical texts and a broad selection of literary texts drawn from all genres and periods of English literature. [3] (HCA)

ENGL3370W - The Bible in LiteratureAn examination of ways in which the Bible and biblical imagery have functioned in literature and fine arts, in both "high culture" and popular culture, from Old English poems to modern poetry, drama, fiction, cartoons, and political rhetoric. Readings include influential biblical texts and a broad selection of literary texts drawn from all genres and periods of English literature. Serves as repeat credit for 3370. [3] (HCA)

ENGL3440W - Pop Science: The Art and Impact of Popular Science Writing(Previously ENGL 3240W) Mechanics and influence of popular science writing in the 21st century. Students will critique bestselling books and award-winning journalism; develop and publish their own blogs with a focus on science, technology, and the environment; and interact with top science writers, editors, and podcasters. Repeat credit for ENGL3240W or CSET 3240W. Not open to students who have earned credit for CSET 3890 section 01offered fall 2019. Total credit hours for this course and CSET 3890 section 01, Fall 2019 will not exceed 3 credit hours. Credit hours reduced from most recent course taken (or from test or transfer credit) as appropriate. [3]

ENGL3610 - The Romantic PeriodProse and poetry of the Wordsworths, the Shelleys, Byron, Keats, and others. Serves as repeat credit for ENGL3610. [3] (HCA)

ENGL3610W - The Romantic PeriodProse and poetry of the Wordsworths, the Shelleys, Byron, Keats, and others. Serves as repeat credit for ENGL3610W. [3] (HCA)

ENGL3611 - The Romantic Period IIENGL3611W - The Romantic Period IICourse DescriptionContinuation of 3610. Prose and poetry of the Wordsworths, the Shelleys, Byron, Keats, and others. Serves as repeat of 3611. [3] (HCA)

ENGL3611W - The Romantic Period IIContinuation of 3610. Prose and poetry of the Wordsworths, the Shelleys, Byron, Keats, and others. Serves as repeat of 3611. [3] (HCA)

ENGL3614 - The Victorian PeriodWorks of Tennyson, Browning, Arnold, Hardy, and others. Serves as repeat credit for ENGL 3614W. [3] (HCA) ENGL3614W - The Victorian Period

Works of Tennyson, Browning, Arnold, Hardy, and others. Serves as repeat credit for ENGL 3614W. [3] (HCA) ENGL3614W - The Victorian PeriodWorks of Tennyson, Browning, Arnold, Hardy, and others. Serves as repeat credit for ENGL 3614. [3] (HCA) ENGL3618 - The Nineteenth-Century English Novel

Works of Tennyson, Browning, Arnold, Hardy, and others. Serves as repeat credit for ENGL 3614. [3] (HCA) ENGL3618 - The Nineteenth-Century English NovelThe study of selected novels of Dickens, Thackeray, Emily Bront√´, George Eliot, George Meredith, Thomas Hardy, and other major novelists of the period. [3] (HCA)

ENGL3618W - The Nineteenth-Century English NovelThe study of selected novels of Dickens, Thackeray, Emily Bront√´, George Eliot, George Meredith, Thomas Hardy, and other major novelists of the period. Serves as repeat credit for 3618. [3] (HCA)

ENGL3620 - Nineteenth-Century American LiteratureExplorations of themes, forms, and social and cultural issues shaping the works of American writers. Authors may include Cooper, Poe, Hawthorne, Douglass, Jacobs, Stowe, Melville, Dickinson, Alcott, Whitman, and Twain.[3] (HCA)

ENGL3620W - Nineteenth-Century American LiteratureExplorations of themes, forms, and social and cultural issues shaping the works of American writers. Authors may include Cooper, Poe, Hawthorne, Douglass, Jacobs, Stowe, Melville, Dickinson, Alcott, Whitman, and Twain.Serves as repeat credit for 3620. [3] (HCA)

ENGL3622 - Nineteenth-Century American Women WritersThemes and forms of American women's prose and poetry, with the emphasis on alternative visions of the frontier, progress, class, race, and self-definition. Authors include Child, Kirkland, Fern, Jacobs, Harper, Dickinson, and Chopin. [3] (HCA)

ENGL3622W - Nineteenth-Century American Women WritersThemes and forms of American women's prose and poetry, with the emphasis on alternative visions of the frontier, progress, class, race, and self-definition. Authors include Child, Kirkland, Fern, Jacobs, Harper, Dickinson, and Chopin. Serves as repeat credit for 3622. [3] (HCA)

ENGL3624W - Literature of the American Civil WarOrigins and impact of the war as depicted in short stories, novels, poems, and films. Harriet Beecher Stowe, Stephen Crane, Margaret Mitchell, William Faulkner, and Margaret Walker. [3] (US)

ENGL3630 - The Modern British NovelThe British novel from the beginning of the twentieth century to the present. Conrad, Joyce, Lawrence, Virginia Woolf, Forster, and other novelists varying at the discretion of instructor. [3] (HCA)

ENGL3630W - The Modern British NovelThe British novel from the beginning of the twentieth century to the present. Conrad, Joyce, Lawrence, Virginia Woolf, Forster, and other novelists varying at the discretion of instructor. Serves as repeat credit for 3630. [3]

ENGL3634 - Modern Irish LiteratureMajor works from the Irish literary revival to the present, with special attention to the works of Yeats, Synge, Joyce, O'Casey, and Beckett. [3] (HCA)

ENGL3634W - Modern Irish LiteratureMajor works from the Irish literary revival to the present, with special attention to the works of Yeats, Synge, Joyce, O'Casey, and Beckett. Serves as repeat credit for 3634. [3] (HCA)

ENGL3640 - Modern British and American Poetry: Yeats to AudenA course in the interpretation and criticism of selected modern masters of poetry, British and American, with the emphasis on poetry as an art. Poets selected may vary at discretion of instructor. [3] (HCA)

ENGL3640W - Modern British and American Poetry: Yeats to AudenA course in the interpretation and criticism of selected modern masters of poetry, British and American, with the emphasis on poetry as an art. Poets selected may vary at discretion of instructor. Serves as repeat credit for 3640. [3] (HCA)

ENGL3642 - Film and ModernismFilm in the context of the major themes of literary modernism: the divided self, language and realism, nihilism and belief, and spatialization of time. [3] (HCA)

ENGL3642W - Film and ModernismFilm in the context of the major themes of literary modernism: the divided self, language and realism, nihilism and belief, and spatialization of time. Serves as repeat credit for 3642. [3] (HCA)

ENGL3644 - Twentieth-Century American NovelExplorations of themes, forms, and social cultural issues shaping the works of American novelists. Authors may include Fitzgerald, Faulkner, Hemingway, Hurston, Ellison, McCarthy, Bellow, Kingston, Morrison, Pynchon.Emphasizes writers before 1945. [3] (HCA)

ENGL3644W - Twentieth-Century American NovelExplorations of themes, forms, and social cultural issues shaping the works of American novelists. Authors may include Fitzgerald, Faulkner, Hemingway, Hurston, Ellison, McCarthy, Bellow, Kingston, Morrison, Pynchon.Emphasizes writers before 1945. Serves as repeat credit for 3644. [3] (HCA)

ENGL3645 - Twentieth-Century American NovelExplorations of themes, forms, and social cultural issues shaping the works of American novelists. Authors may include Fitzgerald, Faulkner, Hemingway, Hurston, Ellison, McCarthy, Bellow, Kingston, Morrison, Pynchon.Emphasizes writers after 1945. [3] (HCA)

ENGL3645W - Twentieth-Century American NovelExplorations of themes, forms, and social cultural issues shaping the works of American novelists. Authors may include Fitzgerald, Faulkner, Hemingway, Hurston, Ellison, McCarthy, Bellow, Kingston, Morrison, Pynchon.Emphasizes writers after 1945. Serves as repeat credit for 3645. [3] (HCA)

ENGL3646 - Poetry Since World War IIPoets studied vary at discretion of instructor. Offered on a graded basis only. [3] (HCA)

ENGL3646W - Poetry Since World War IIPoets studied vary at discretion of instructor. Offered on a graded basis only. Serves as repeat credit for 3646.[3] (HCA)

ENGL3650 - Ethnic American LiteratureTexts and theory relevant to understanding race, culture, and ethnicity in the formation of American culture.Literature from at least three of the following groups: African Americans, Native Americans, Asian Americans, Chicano/Latino Americans, Caribbean Americans, and European Americans. [3] (P)

ENGL3650W - Ethnic American LiteratureTexts and theory relevant to understanding race, culture, and ethnicity in the formation of American culture.Literature from at least three of the following groups: African Americans, Native Americans, Asian Americans, Chicano/Latino Americans, Caribbean Americans, and European Americans. [3] (P)

ENGL3654 - African American LiteratureExamination of the literature produced by African Americans. May include literary movements, vernacular traditions, social discourses, material culture, and critical theories. Repeat credit for students who have completed 3654W. [3] (US)

ENGL3654W - African American LiteratureExamination of the literature produced by African Americans. May include literary movements, vernacular traditions, social discourses, material culture, and critical theories. Repeat credit for students who have completed 3654. [3] (US)

ENGL3656 - Existential LiteratureExistential concepts, their relevance to literature, culture, and living. Exploring novels of Jean-Paul Sartre, Simone de Beauvoir, and Albert Camus, and the spread of existential ideas into various medias including film, television, poetry, and internet forms. Not open to students who have completed ENGL 1111-31 or HONS1810W-56. [3] (HCA)

ENGL3656W - Existential LiteratureExistential concepts, their relevance to literature, culture, and living. Exploring novels of Jean-Paul Sartre, Simone de Beauvoir, and Albert Camus, and the spread of existential ideas into various medias including film, television, poetry, and internet forms. Not open to students who have completed ENGL 1111-31 or HONS1810W-56. [3] (HCA)

ENGL3658 - Latino-American LiteratureTexts and theory relevant to understanding constructs of Latino identity, including race, class, gender, and basis for immigration, in the context of American culture. The course focuses on the examination of literature by Chicano, Puerto Rican, Cuban, Dominican, and Latin American writers in the United States. Serves as repeat credit for ENGL 3658W. [3] (P)

ENGL3658W - Latino-American LiteratureTexts and theory relevant to understanding constructs of Latino identity, including race, class, gender, and basis for immigration, in the context of American culture. The course focuses on the examination of literature by Chicano, Puerto Rican, Cuban, Dominican, and Latin American writers in the United States. Serves as repeat credit for ENGL 3658. [3] (P)

ENGL3659W - Cultures of the U.S.-Mexico BorderlandsLiterary and ethnic studies. Territories since the U.S.-Mexico War (1846-48). Representations of borders and nations. Serves as repeat credit for ENGL 3890W section 01 offered fall 2021. [3] (HCA)

ENGL3662 - Asian American LiteratureDiversity of Asian American literary production with specific attention to works after 1965. Topics such as gender and sexuality, memory and desire, and diaspora and panethnicity in the context of aesthetics and politics of Asian American experience. [3] (P)

ENGL3662W - Asian American LiteratureDiversity of Asian American literary production with specific attention to works after 1965. Topics such as gender and sexuality, memory and desire, and diaspora and panethnicity in the context of aesthetics and politics of Asian American experience. [3] (P)

ENGL3664 - Jewish American LiteratureNineteenth century to the present. Issues of race, gender, ethnicity, immigration, and diaspora. Offered on a graded basis only. [3] (HCA)

ENGL3664W - Jewish American LiteratureNineteenth century to the present. Issues of race, gender, ethnicity, immigration, and diaspora. Offered on a graded basis only. Serves as repeat credit for 3664. [3] (HCA)

ENGL3670 - Colonial and Post-Colonial LiteratureLiterature exploring European colonialism and its aftermath from the eighteenth century to the present: language, gender, and agency in the colonial encounter; anti-colonial resistance movements; and postcolonial cultures. Topics may vary; course may be taken more than once with permission of the Director ofUndergraduate Studies. [3] (HCA)

ENGL3670W - Colonial and Post-Colonial LiteratureLiterature exploring European colonialism and its aftermath from the eighteenth century to the present: language, gender, and agency in the colonial encounter; anti-colonial resistance movements; and postcolonial cultures. Topics may vary; course may be taken more than once with permission of the Director ofUndergraduate Studies. [3] (HCA)

ENGL3674 - Caribbean LiteratureCaribbean literature from 1902 to the present. Emphasis on writing since 1952, which marks the beginning of West Indian nationalism and the rise of the West Indian novel. [3] (INT)

ENGL3674W - Caribbean LiteratureCaribbean literature from 1902 to the present. Emphasis on writing since 1952, which marks the beginning of West Indian nationalism and the rise of the West Indian novel. Serves as repeat credit for 3674. [3] (INT) ENGL3678 - Anglophone African Literature

Caribbean literature from 1902 to the present. Emphasis on writing since 1952, which marks the beginning of West Indian nationalism and the rise of the West Indian novel. Serves as repeat credit for 3674. [3] (INT) ENGL3678 - Anglophone African LiteratureFrom the Sundiata Epic to the present with emphasis on the novel. Attention to issues of identity, post coloniality, nationalism, race, and ethnicity in both SubSaharan and Mahgrib literatures. Such authors as Achebe, Ngugi, Gordimer, Awoonor, and El Saadaw. Serves as repeat credit for ENGL 3678W. [3] (INT)

ENGL3678W - Anglophone African LiteratureFrom the Sundiata Epic to the present with emphasis on the novel. Attention to issues of identity, post coloniality, nationalism, race, and ethnicity in both SubSaharan and Mahgrib literatures. Such authors as Achebe, Ngugi, Gordimer, Awoonor, and El Saadaw. Serves as repeat credit for ENGL 3678. [3] (INT)

ENGL3680 - Twentieth Century American DramaTopics in twentieth century drama drawn from the American, British, and/or world traditions. Formal structures of dramatic literature studied within contexts of performance, theatrical production, and specific dramatic careers. Authors may include O'Neill, Albee, Hansberry, Hellman, Stoppard, Wilson, and Churchill. Emphasizes American drama. [3] (US)

ENGL3680W - Twentieth Century American DramaTopics in twentieth century drama drawn from the American, British, and/or world traditions. Formal structures of dramatic literature studied within contexts of performance, theatrical production, and specific dramatic careers. Authors may include O'Neill, Albee, Hansberry, Hellman, Stoppard, Wilson, and Churchill. Emphasizes American drama. Serves as repeat credit for 3680. [3] (US)

ENGL3681 - Twentieth-Century DramaTopics in twentieth century drama drawn from the American, British, and/or world traditions. Formal structures of dramatic literature studied within contexts of performance, theatrical production, and specific dramatic careers. Authors may include O'Neill, Albee, Hansberry, Hellman, Stoppard, Wilson, and Churchill. Emphasizes British and world drama. [3] (US)

ENGL3683 - Contemporary British LiteratureThe novel, short story, and verse in Great Britain since World War II. [3] (HCA)

ENGL3683W - Contemporary British LiteratureENGL3692 - Desire in America: Literature, Cinema, and HistoryCourse DescriptionThe influence of desire and repression in shaping American culture and character from the mid-nineteenth century to the present. [3] (US)

ENGL3692 - Desire in America: Literature, Cinema, and HistoryThe influence of desire and repression in shaping American culture and character from the mid-nineteenth century to the present. [3] (US)

ENGL3694 - America on Film: Art and IdeologyAmerican culture and character through film, film theory, and literature. [3] (US)

ENGL3695 - America on Film: Performance and CultureFilm performance in the construction of identity and gender, social meaning and narrative, public image and influence in America. [3] (US)

ENGL3710 - Literature and Intellectual HistoryFiction, poetry, and prose writings that represent overarching themes in English and/or American literature across conventional historical periods in order to define and trace their genealogy and evolution. [3] (HCA) ENGL3711 - Literature and Intellectual History

Fiction, poetry, and prose writings that represent overarching themes in English and/or American literature across conventional historical periods in order to define and trace their genealogy and evolution. [3] (HCA) ENGL3711 - Literature and Intellectual HistoryThe emergence of modern consciousness in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries. Serves as repeat credit for ENGL 3711W. [3] (HCA)

ENGL3711W - Literature and Intellectual HistoryThe emergence of modern consciousness in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries. Serves as repeat credit for ENGL 3711. [3] (HCA)

ENGL3720 - Literature, Science, and TechnologyThe relationship of science and technology to literature, film, and popular media. Focus on such topics as digital technology, genetics, and the representation of science in particular periods, genres, movements, and critical theories. Repeat credit for students who have completed 3720W. [3] (P)

ENGL3720W - Literature, Science, and TechnologyThe relationship of science and technology to literature, film, and popular media. Focus on such topics as digital technology, genetics, and the representation of science in particular periods, genres, movements, and critical theories. Repeat credit for students who have completed 3720. [3] (P)

ENGL3726 - New MediaHistory, theory, and design of digital media. Literature, video, film, online games, and other interactive narratives. Not open to students who have completed 1111 section 60. Serves as repeat credit for CMA 3333 01, section 01 in Fall 2020, and for ENGL 3333, section 01 in Fall 2020. [3] (HCA)

ENGL3726W - New MediaHistory, theory, and design of digital media. Literature, video, film, online games, and other interactive narratives. Serves as repeat credit for 3726. Not open to students who have earned credit for 1111 section 60.Serves as repeat credit for CMA 3333 01, section 01 in Fall 2020, and for ENGL 3333, section 01 in Fall 2020. [3]

ENGL3728 - Science FictionSocial and historical developments within the genre. Works from the late nineteenth century to the present.Cultural issues, including race, gender, sexuality, violence, and the representation of science. Repeat credit for students who have completed 3728W. [3] (P)

ENGL3728W - Science FictionSocial and historical developments within the genre. Works from the late nineteenth century to the present.Cultural issues, including race, gender, sexuality, violence, and the representation of science. Repeat credit for students who have completed 3728. [3] (P)

ENGL3730 - Literature and the EnvironmentEnvironmental issues from British, American, and global perspectives. Methodological approaches such as ecocriticism, environmental and social justice, ethics, and activism. The role of literature and the imagination in responding to ecological problems and shaping environmental values. [3] (HCA)

ENGL3730W - Literature and the EnvironmentEnvironmental issues from British, American, and global perspectives. Methodological approaches such as ecocriticism, environmental and social justice, ethics, and activism. The role of literature and the imagination in responding to ecological problems and shaping environmental values. Serves as repeat credit for 3730. [3]

ENGL3731 - Climate and LiteratureLiterary responses to climate issues from British, American, and global perspectives. Methodological approaches such as ecocriticism, climate justice, ethics, and activism. [3] (HCA)

ENGL3734 - Literature and LawStudy of the relationship between the discourses of law and literature. Focus on such topics as legal narratives, metaphor in the courts, representations of justice on the social stage. Repeat credit for students who have completed 3734W. [3] (HCA)

ENGL3734W - Literature and LawStudy of the relationship between the discourses of law and literature. Focus on such topics as legal narratives, metaphor in the courts, representations of justice on the social stage. Repeat credit for students who have completed 3734. [3] (HCA)

ENGL3736 - Words and MusicAn investigation of works of literature that have inspired musical settings and the musical settings themselves.Emphasis on literary and musical analysis and interpretation. No musical background assumed. Repeat credit for students who have completed MUSL 2330. [3] (HCA)

ENGL3736W - Words and MusicAn investigation of works of literature that have inspired musical settings and the musical settings themselves.Emphasis on literary and musical analysis and interpretation. No musical background assumed. Repeat credit for students who have completed 3736 or MUSL 2330. [3] (HCA)

ENGL3740 - Critical TheoryMajor theoretical approaches that have shaped critical discourse, the practices of reading, and the relation of literature and culture. [3] (HCA)

ENGL3740W - Critical TheoryMajor theoretical approaches that have shaped critical discourse, the practices of reading, and the relation of literature and culture. Serves as repeat credit for 3740. [3] (HCA)

ENGL3742 - Feminist TheoryAn introduction to feminist theory. Topics include cross-cultural gender identities; the development of"masculinity" and "femininity"; racial, ethnic, class, and national differences; sexual orientations; the function of ideology; strategies of resistance; visual and textual representations; the nature of power. Serves as repeat credit for ENGL 3742W. [3] (P)

ENGL3742W - Feminist TheoryAn introduction to feminist theory. Topics include cross-cultural gender identities; the development of"masculinity" and "femininity"; racial, ethnic, class, and national differences; sexual orientations; the function of ideology; strategies of resistance; visual and textual representations; the nature of power. Serves as repeat credit for ENGL 3742. [3] (P)

ENGL3744 - Advanced PoetryFormal analysis and close reading of major poems in the extended canon of British and American poetry.Related examples of historical, theoretical, and applied criticism. [3] (HCA)

ENGL3746 - Workshop in English and History(Also listed as History 3746) Team-taught by a historian and an interdisciplinary scholar. Explores intersection of disciplines through close examination of texts in historical context. Preference to students majoring in the English-History program. May be repeated for credit more than once if there is no duplication in topic. Students may enroll in more than one section of this course each semester. [3] (No AXLE credit)

ENGL3748 - Introduction to English LinguisticsSystematic study of present-day English sounds, words, sentences, and the contexts of language production.Contemporary varieties of English. [3] (HCA)

ENGL3851 - Independent StudyDesigned primarily for majors. Projects are arranged with individual professors and must be confirmed with the director of undergraduate studies within two weeks of the beginning of classes; otherwise the student will be dropped from the 3851 rolls. May be repeated for a total of 6 credits in 3851 and 3852 combined if there is no duplication in topic, but students may earn only up to 3 credits per semester of enrollment. [1-3; maximum of 6

ENGL3852 - Independent StudyDesigned primarily for majors. Projects are arranged with individual professors and must be confirmed with the director of undergraduate studies within two weeks of the beginning of classes; otherwise the student will be dropped from the 3852 rolls. May be repeated for a total of 6 credits in 3851 and 3852 combined if there is no duplication in topic, but students may earn only up to 3 credits per semester of enrollment. [1-3; maximum of 6

ENGL3890 - Movements in LiteratureStudies in intellectual currents that create a group or school of writers within a historical period. May be repeated for credit more than once if there is no duplication in topic. Students may enroll in more than one section of this course each semester. [3] (HCA)

ENGL3890W - Movements in LiteratureStudies in intellectual currents that create a group or school of writers within a historical period. May be repeated for credit more than once if there is no duplication in topic. Students may enroll in more than one section of this course each semester. [3] (HCA)

ENGL3891 - Special Topics in Creative WritingAdvanced instruction in creative writing in emerging modes and hybrid genres. May be repeated for credit if there is no duplication in topic. [3] (HCA)

ENGL3892 - Problems in LiteratureStudies in common themes, issues, or motifs across several historical periods. May be repeated for credit more than once if there is no duplication in topic. Students may enroll in more than one section of this course each semester. [3] (HCA)

ENGL3892W - Problems in LiteratureStudies in common themes, issues, or motifs across several historical periods. May be repeated for credit more than once if there is no duplication in topic. Students may enroll in more than one section of this course each semester. [3] (HCA)

ENGL3894 - Major Figures in LiteratureStudies in the works of one or two writers with attention to the development of a writer's individual canon, the biographical dimension of this work, and critical responses to it. May be repeated for credit more than once if there is no duplication in topic. Students may enroll in more than one section of this course each semester. [3]

ENGL3894W - Major Figures in Literature[Studies in the works of one or two writers with attention to the development of a writer's individual canon, the biographical dimension of this work, and critical responses to it. May be repeated for credit more than once if there is no duplication in topic. Students may enroll in more than one section of this course each semester. [3]

ENGL3896 - Special Topics in Investigative Writing in AmericaCourse will be taught by a distinguished visiting journalist from a major U.S. newspaper or magazine. May be repeated for credit once if there is no duplication in topic. Students may enroll in more than one section of this course each semester. [1-3; maximum of 6 credits total for all semesters of ENGL 3896] (No AXLE credit) ENGL3896W - Special Topics in Investigative Writing in America

Course will be taught by a distinguished visiting journalist from a major U.S. newspaper or magazine. May be repeated for credit once if there is no duplication in topic. Students may enroll in more than one section of this course each semester. [1-3; maximum of 6 credits total for all semesters of ENGL 3896] (No AXLE credit) ENGL3896W - Special Topics in Investigative Writing in AmericaCourse will be taught by a distinguished visiting journalist from a major U.S. newspaper or magazine. May be repeated for credit once if there is no duplication in topic. Students may enroll in more than one section of this course each semester. [1-3; maximum of 6 credits total] (No AXLE credit)

ENGL3897 - Special Topics in Critical TheoryDiverse range of literary, philosophical, cultural, and political texts. May be repeated for credit if there is no duplication in topic. Students may enroll in more than one section of this course per semester. [3] (HCA) ENGL3897W - Special Topics in Critical Theory

Diverse range of literary, philosophical, cultural, and political texts. May be repeated for credit if there is no duplication in topic. Students may enroll in more than one section of this course per semester. [3] (HCA) ENGL3897W - Special Topics in Critical TheoryENGL3898 - Special Topics in English and American LiteratureCourse DescriptionTopics vary. May be repeated for credit more than once if there is no duplication in topic. Students may enroll in more than one section of this course each semester. [3] (HCA)

ENGL3898 - Special Topics in English and American LiteratureTopics vary. May be repeated for credit more than once if there is no duplication in topic. Students may enroll in more than one section of this course each semester. [3] (HCA)

ENGL3898W - Special Topics in English and American LiteratureTopics vary. May be repeated for credit more than once if there is no duplication in topic. Students may enroll in more than one section of this course each semester. [3] (HCA)

ENGL3899 - Special Topics in FilmTheory and practice of cinema as an aesthetic and cultural form. May be repeated for credit once if there is no duplication in topic. Students may enroll in more than one section of this course per semester. [3; maximum of 6 credits total for all semesters of ENGL 3899] (HCA)

ENGL4960 - Senior Year CapstoneTopic chosen by the instructor. Prerequisite: 2200. [3] (No AXLE credit)

ENGL4998 - Honors ColloquiumBackground for writing the honors thesis. Emphasis on research methods, critical approaches, and the students'own projects. Limited to seniors admitted to the English Honors Program. [3] (No AXLE credit)

ENGL4999 - Honors ThesisPrerequisite: 4998. [3] (No AXLE credit)

ENED2200 - Exploring Literature for ChildrenExplores characteristics of good literature for children ages birth to 12, authors and illustrators of the genre, and issues in the area of children's literature. [3]

ENED2430 - Fostering Language in Diverse ClassroomsOverview of language learning, emphasizing ages 3 - 8 and the role of teachers and parents in fostering growth.Variability associated with culture, income, home language and individual child characteristics is examined from developmental and sociolinguistic perspectives. Students examine language use and teaching as part of an 8hour practicum in an early childhood classroom. [3]

ENED3310 - Language Study in the Secondary ClassroomInvestigates various methods of approaching grammar, vocabulary spelling, semantics, and bi-dialectism in the English classroom. For teachers and prospective teachers of middle school and high school English. [3]

ENED3320 - Untapped Potential: The Power of Books for Fostering Language and LearningThis course fosters an understanding of the importance of developing oral language and thinking skills in read alouds and develops students' competence in implementing instructional strategies in their work with children and families. Course content explores historical trends and lines of inquiry in storybook reading research over the past four decades and engages students in critical conversations about the extent to which current pedagogical practices reflect or rebuff research recommendations. The course explores book selection, vocabulary development, inferential reasoning, the use of repeated readings, responding to students' questions and confusions, and crafting high-cognitive demand discussions in narratives read aloud to children from Pre-Kthrough fourth grade. The roles of adults and approaches to sharing books with children are explored from developmental and cultural perspectives. Content includes careful study and discussion of narrative picture books, criteria for identifying high-quality literature, and extracting worthy story themes with an aim toward developing skill in using books that embody humanizing pedagogies and diverse perspectives. Assignments involve the application of course content to teacher observations, the implementation of multiple readings in embedded fieldwork experiences, book studies, and the opportunities for special projects related to nuanced interest areas. [3]

ENED3340 - Reading and Learning with Print and New MediaStudies print and technology-based approaches to improving reading and content area learning in grades 6-12with a special emphasis on diverse learners and struggling readers. Drawing on research-based practice, students learn to design, enact, and assess effective reading and literacy instruction. [3]

ENED3350 - Literature, Popular Culture, and New MediaExamines a wide range of multigenre, multimodal, and digital texts appropriate for readers of middle school and high school age. Considers the influence of popular culture and digital technologies on young adult literature.Includes materials and texts for readers of various ability levels. [3]

ENED3357 - Literature, Pop Culture, and New MediaConsiders the influence of popular culture and digital technologies on young adult literature and the ways in which societal critique, role of the media, and negotiating identity categories play out in those texts. Examines a wide range of Multigenre, multimodal, and digital fiction focused on various themes such as Real and Imagined Worlds: Gaming and Technology in Texts, Vampires, Zombies, Werewolves and Monsters: Imagining the Other, ans Who am I? Race, Class, Gender, and Sexual Identity in Literature. [3]

ENED3370 - Teaching Literature and New Media in the Secondary SchoolStudents study how pedagogy might be developed that connects traditional literature instruction with media popular cultural media. Methods and theories for reading and teaching short stories, poetry, and novels are juxtaposed and interwoven with methods and theories for reading and teaching web sites, comics, film, and other media. Prerequisite: EDUC 3310 or consent of instructor. Corequisite: ENED 3371. [3]

ENED3371 - Professional Year PracticumObservation, participation, and teaching in middle school and secondary school settings. Corequisite: ENED3370. [1-3]

ENED3380 - Teaching Writing in Secondary SchoolsDesigned to encourage student teachers to examine the complexities of teaching writing in middle and high school settings and to develop a theoretically sound methodology that will allow them to design meaningful, engaging, and thoughtful writing instruction. [3]

ENED3400 - Harry Potter and Children's LiteratureStudents will examine British Literature related to J.K. Rowling's novels. Students will be asked to relate what they learn from other children's literature to the characters, plot, and themes of the Harry Potter novels as well as the opportunity to perform a variety of critical analyses of a social/cultural phenomena with progressive young adult literature. Additionally, students will explore the film versions of all novels discussed to analyze and critique the adaptations. This is a weekend course that includes week-long travel to the United Kingdom where students will engage in the stories in an experiential journey of local UK sites, studios, and museums. [3]

ENED3410 - Literature of Social TransformationHistorical events, issues, and movements are often explored in literature for children and adolescents. The literature helps make history come alive. This class will focus on stories relating to the Civil Rights Movement that led to social transformation the United States. In this weekend course, students will explore books written for children/young adults, discuss specific episodes of the Movement where youth had great impact, and visit libraries, museums, and related sites. [3]

ENED3850 - Independent Study in English EducationSemi-independent study on selected topics in English education. Consent of supervising instructor required. May be repeated. [1-3]

ENED3890 - Special Topics in English EducationExploration of special topics related to English education. May be repeated with change of topic. [1-3]

ENED4963 - Student Teaching Seminar: SecondarySeminar to accompany EDUC 4953. A $300.00 Teacher Performance Assessment fee is associated with this course. [3]

MUSE1010 - Instrumental EnsemblesOpen by audition to all Vanderbilt students. Musicians participate in orchestra, wind ensembles, and/or a variety of smaller ensembles on a rotational basis through the course of the semester. Performances include symphonic repertoire from the Classical and Romantic periods as well as standard and new repertoire from Baroque to Contemporary. At least three formal concerts are presented each semester. [1] Fountain, Verrier.

MUSE1020 - Vanderbilt University SingersOpen by audition to all Vanderbilt students regardless of major. This choral ensemble performs a wide variety of choral music spanning Renaissance to contemporary music, and often combines with the Vanderbilt Symphony Orchestra on large works. At least two formal concerts per semester. [1] Biddlecombe.

MUSE1030 - Vanderbilt Opera TheatreOpen by audition to all Vanderbilt students. Performance material chosen from all forms of lyric theatre: standard operatic repertoire, operetta, and American musical theatre. At least one production is presented.FALL. [1] Shay.

MUSE1200 - Steel Drum/Pan EnsembleOpen to all members of the Vanderbilt community, this course provides a laboratory and performanceexperience drawing on Caribbean steel drums/pans with emphasis on the music and dance repertories of the island of Trinidad. Lecture-demonstrations and rehearsals in one weekly two-hour session. At least one public performance each semester. No previous experience required. [1] Britain.

MUSE1210 - Steel Drum/Pan EnsembleOpen to all members of the Vanderbilt community, this course provides a laboratory and performanceexperience drawing on Caribbean steel drums/pans with emphasis on the music and dance repertories of the island of Trinidad. Lecture-demonstrations and rehearsals in one weekly two-hour session. At least one public performance each semester. Ability to read musical notation required. [1] Britain.

MUSE1220 - Steel Drum/Pan EnsembleOpen to all members of the Vanderbilt community, this course provides a laboratory and performanceexperience drawing on Caribbean steel drums/pans with emphasis on the music and dance repertories of the island of Trinidad. Lecture-demonstrations and rehearsals in one weekly two-hour session. At least one public performance each semester. Ability to read musical notation required. Prerequisite: MUSE 1200 or 1210. [1]

MUSE1230 - African Performing EnsembleOpen to all members of the Vanderbilt community, this course provides a laboratory and performanceexperience drawing on traditional African musical instruments (drums, percussion, winds) with an emphasis on West African (Ghana) and East African (Uganda) music and dance repertories. Lecture-demonstrations and rehearsals in one weekly two-hour session. At least one public performance each semester. No previous experience required. [1] Ahima.

MUSE1232 - Advanced African DrummingAdvanced laboratory and performance experience drawing on traditional African musical instruments (drums, percussion, winds) with an emphasis on West African (Ghana) and East African (Uganda) music and dance repertories. Lecture-demonstrations and rehearsals in one weekly two-hour session. At least one public performance each semester. Prerequisite MUSE 1230 or permission from the instructor. [1]

MUSE1310 - Jazz Ensemble: Big BandOpen by audition to all Vanderbilt students, this ensemble performs both traditional and modern jazz styles, including dance band, swing, contemporary, and charts currently under development. Improvisation, jazz timbres, and other idiomatic concepts explored through lecture-demonstration and performance. At least one concert is presented each semester. Co-requisite: JAZZ 1000. [1] Middagh

MUSE1320 - Jazz Ensemble: Small ComboOpen by audition to all Vanderbilt students. Provides focused laboratory training for performance of composed and improvised small combo jazz traditions. Discussion and application of techniques associated with solo, sectional, and ensemble performance in jazz. At least one concert is presented each semester. Co-requisite: JAZZ 1000. [1]

MUSE1330 - Blair Jazz ChoirOpen by audition to all Vanderbilt students; ensemble is limited to 12 voices, plus rhythm section. Repertoire includes scat, contemporary, and standard jazz. On- and off-campus performances throughout the semester. [1]

MUSE1340 - Special Ensemble in Jazz and Global MusicAnnually rotating ensemble focused on a particular musical style representative of jazz or global music traditions. Open to all undergraduates. Co-requisite: JAZZ 1000. [1]

MUSE2120 - Vanderbilt ChoraleOpen by audition to all Vanderbilt students, this select 36-40 voice choral ensemble performs music in a variety of styles. At least two formal concerts each semester. [1] Biddlecombe.

MUSE2210 - Instrumental Chamber MusicOpen to all Vanderbilt students by audition or upon recommendation of the private instructor. Size of ensembles may vary. One hour weekly coaching. Two hours of additional rehearsal each week. [Variable credit: ¬Ω, 1, or 2

MUSE2220 - Chamber Music: PercussionOpen to percussion majors and minors. Size of ensembles will vary. One hour weekly coaching and two hours of additional rehearsal (independent of coaching) expected each week. [¬Ω or 1] Jung.

MUSE2230 - Chamber Music: Sonata Class for Strings and PianoOne hour weekly class for performance and study of string (violin, viola, cello, bass) and piano sonatas from the standard repertoire, baroque through modern, with each sonata duo receiving thirty minutes of coaching within the class time. Performance of complete sonata during the last class of the semester. Two hours of additional rehearsal each week. Open by consent of instructor. [1] Dorfman, Plummer.

MUSE2240 - Chamber Music: String QuartetOpen by consent of instructor. One hour of coaching and at least two hours of additional rehearsal each week.[Variable credit: ¬Ω, 1, or 2 each semester] Kochanowski.

MUSE2270 - Baroque Chamber MusicOpen to all Vanderbilt students with experience on Baroque instruments or upon recommendation of the private instructor. Size of ensembles may vary. Students will receive one hour of coaching and are expected to rehearse at least two additional hours each week.MUSE2280 - Chamber Music: Contemporary Music EnsembleCourse DescriptionOpen to all Vanderbilt students by audition, this ensemble will perform instrumental and vocal chamber works of the modern and contemporary periods. Includes weekly coaching and two required hours of additional rehearsal (independent of coaching) each week. [1]

MUSE2280 - Chamber Music: Contemporary Music EnsembleOpen to all Vanderbilt students by audition, this ensemble will perform instrumental and vocal chamber works of the modern and contemporary periods. Includes weekly coaching and two required hours of additional rehearsal (independent of coaching) each week. [1]

MUSE2300 - Collaborative Techniques for PianistsBasic ensemble techniques in vocal and instrumental collaboration, including orchestral reductions,instrumental repertoire, recitatives/arias, songs, and introduction to diction/translation of song texts. Both group and individual coaching. Open to B.Mus. and B.Mus.Arts piano majors or by consent of instructor.MUSE2310 - Collaborative Piano: InstrumentalCourse DescriptionIntroduces pianists to collaboration with instrumentalists. Weekly coaching with piano instructor and 5 hours practice/rehearsal per week. Standard instrumental repertoire will be assigned. Open by consent of instructor.[Variable credit: ¬Ω, 1, or 2 each semester] Dorfman, Nies, Melissa Rose.

MUSE2310 - Collaborative Piano: InstrumentalIntroduces pianists to collaboration with instrumentalists. Weekly coaching with piano instructor and 5 hours practice/rehearsal per week. Standard instrumental repertoire will be assigned. Open by consent of instructor.[Variable credit: ¬Ω, 1, or 2 each semester] Dorfman, Nies, Melissa Rose.

MUSE2320 - Collaborative Piano: VocalIntroduces pianists to collaboration with singers. Weekly coaching with piano instructor and 5 hours practice/rehearsal per week. Focus on standard art song and opera repertoire. Open by consent of instructor.[Variable credit: 1-2 each semester] Dorfman, Nies, Melissa Rose.

MUSE2330 - Vocal Chamber MusicOpen by consent of the instructor. One hour weekly coaching for vocal/instrumental duos or ensembles, including singer/piano duos. Two hours of additional rehearsal each week. [Variable credit: ¬Ω, 1, or 2 each semester] Dorfman, Melissa Rose.

ENVE3610 - Sustainable DevelopmentQuantitative investigation of the role of adequate and renewable resources for continual economicdevelopment. Past and present resource challenges, influences of indigenous, national, and international cultures, land use practices, social policy, and economic strategies on infrastructure development. Future challenges posed by climate change, and how market- and government-based policies may be applied inconditions of uncertainty to encourage sustainable development. SPRING. [3]

ENVE4305 - Enterprise Risk ManagementDevelopment of an organization-wide risk management program for protecting human health, the environment and business continuity. Focus on defining an all-hazards risk management process and programimplementation, performing risk assessments, determining and selecting appropriate risk reduction strategies, and influencing risk management decisions internally and externally. Applications drawn from natural disasters, man-made accidents and intentional acts. Prerequisite: Senior standing. SPRING. [3]

ENVE4600 - Environmental ChemistryTheoretical aspects of physical, organic, and inorganic chemistry applied to environmental engineering.Estimation of chemical parameters based on thermodynamic and structural activity relationships, pH as a master variable, equilibrium processes in the environment, including the carbonate system, metal complexation and precipitation. Prerequisite: CHEM 1601. FALL. [3]

ENVE4605 - Environmental Thermodynamics, Kinetics, and Mass TransferExamination of fundamental environmental processes and phenomena. Uses of equilibrium phenomena, process rate and mass transport phenomena to solve a broad range of environmental problems. Prerequisite: CHEM1602, MATH 2420, CE 3600. SPRING. [3]

ENVE4610 - Biological Processes in Environmental SystemsPrinciples of biology and their application to wastewater treatment processes with emphasis on microbial ecology, bioenergetics, and the role of chemical structure in biodegradability. Utilization kinetics of inhibitory and non-inhibitory organic compounds. Biological process analysis and design (aerobic and anaerobic) for municipal and industrial wastewaters, using a mass balance approach. SPRING. [3]

ENVE4615 - Environmental AssessmentsDesign and conduct of environmental assessments to evaluate risks posed by infrastructure systems or environmental contamination. Impact analyses for sources, infrastructure modifications, due diligence environmental audits, and contaminated site remedial investigations. Prerequisite: Senior standing. FALL. [3]

ENVE4620 - Environmental Characterization and AnalysisAcquisition and interpretation of environmental data. Principles of chemical measurement, sample collection and sample program design; laboratory safety and good laboratory practices; analytical instrumentation and methods; quality assurance and quality control; and statistical interpretation of data. Hands-on experience through demonstrations featuring state-of-the-art analytical instrumentation. Prerequisite: CE 3600, ENVE 4600.SPRING. [3]

ENVE4625 - Environmental Separations ProcessesFundamentals and applications of separations processes relevant to water and wastewater treatment and other environmental systems. Topics include coagulation/flocculation, sedimentation, granular filtration; advanced separation processes such as various membrane processes, absorption, ion exchange, thermally drivenseparations, and electrically driven separations including electrodialysis and capacitive deionization. SPRING. [3]

ENVE4700 - Energy and Water ResourcesScientific, technological, philosophical, and social issues surrounding approaches to carbon-based energy and alternative energy resources, management of carbon through sequestration, supplying and treating water for agriculture, communities, and industry, and changing climate impacts on regional distribution of water resources. SPRING. [3]

ENVE4705 - Physical HydrologyDevelopment of fundamental bases of hydrological processes. Land-atmosphere processes, surface-water flows, soil moisture dynamics, and groundwater flows. Exposition of physical principles, their embodiment in mathematical models, and their use in interpreting observations in the field and laboratory. Prerequisites: CE3700 or ME 3224 or ChBE 3300 or EES 4550. FALL. [3]

ENVE4710 - HydrologyThe hydrologic cycle, study of precipitation, evapotranspiration, hydrometeorology, stream flow, flood flow, flood routing, storm sewer design, detention basin design, and water quality. Prerequisite: CE 3700, CE 3705.FALL. [3]

ENVE4715 - Groundwater HydrologyThe occurrence and flow of ground water. Basic concepts of the effects of varying permeability and capillarity on seepage flow. Flow toward wells, through dikes, and beneath dams. Prerequisite: MATH 2420, CE 3700.SPRING. [3]

ENVE4720 - Surface Water Quality ModelingAnalysis of physical, chemical, biological, and physiological contaminants in streams, lakes, and estuaries, and surface water/groundwater interfaces. Analytical and numerical modeling techniques. One- and two-dimension computer simulation of surface water quality. Prerequisite: ENVE 4605. SPRING. [3]

ENVE4800 - Nuclear Environmental EngineeringThe nuclear fuel cycle and environmental and societal impacts associated with its traditional implementation.Technical and programmatic challenges associated with fuel production, and waste management including processing, storage, transportation, decontamination, decommissioning, and environmental restoration.Technologies and approaches for reducing impacts of the nuclear fuel cycle. Prerequisite: Senior or graduate standing. SPRING. [3]

ENVS1001 - Commons iSeminarTopics vary. General Elective credit only. [1] (No AXLE credit)

ENVS1101 - Foundations of Climate StudiesScholarship from across the natural sciences, social sciences, and humanities. History and science of climate change;, the cultural and political-economic systems that shape climate injustice. Challenges and possible solutions to the climate crisis. [3] (P)

ENVS3301 - NGOs, Society, and Climate ChangeNonprofits as complex and diverse actors engaged in climate mitigation, climate adaptation, policy, and energy justice. Logics of nonprofit organizations; grant-writing. Perspectives and insights from sociology, political science, and nonprofit studies. [3] (SBS)

ENVS3851 - Independent Research and WritingIndependent research on issues of theoretical and/or practical relevance to understanding and addressing climate & environmental change. Students may enroll in more than one section of this course each semester.May be repeated for a total of 6 credits. [1-6] (No AXLE credit).

ENVS4101 - Society and the Environment CapstoneThe relationship between society and the environment. Sustainability, adaptation, climate science, and policy.Open only to junior and senior ENVS minors. [3] (SBS)

ENVS4101W - Society and the Environment CapstoneThe relationship between society and the environment. Sustainability, adaptation, climate science, and policy.Open only to junior and senior ENVS minors. Repeat credit for students who have completed ENVS 4101. [3]

ENVS4961 - Special TopicsTopics vary. May be repeated for credit more than once if there is no duplication in topic. Students may enroll in more than one section of this course each semester. [3] (No AXLE credit)

ENVS4981 - Climate Studies Honors RsrchResearch and writing supervised by program faculty. Students are expected to take 3 credits in the fall and 3credits in the spring term. Open only to honors candidates. Prerequisite or corequisite: completion of methods and practices requirement for the Climate Studies major. [3; maximum of 9 credits total for all semesters of 4981] [3] (No AXLE credit)

EUS1001 - Commons iSeminarTopics vary. General Elective credit only. [1] (No AXLE credit)

EUS2201 - European Society and CultureAn interdisciplinary survey of European society, culture, and politics since 1900. [3] (INT)

EUS2203 - The Idea of EuropeEuropean identity from ancient ideals to its reality as the European Union. Emphasis on Europe as cultural construct and definable space. Historical, political, religious, philosophical, and cultural movements for Europe's claim to legitimacy. [3] (INT)

EUS2208 - Conspiracy Theories and Rumors in European and U.S. HistoryFrom 1600 to the present. Jesuits, Jews, and the Illuminati. The American and French Revolutions, McCarthyism, UFOs, and New World Order theories. [3] (INT)

EUS2210 - European Avant-Garde MovementsTwentieth-century European aesthetic, political, and social imagination from Expressionism and Dadaism to Fluxus and Happenings. Connection between aesthetics and capitalism. Impact of World Wars on art and literature, gender roles, and 'exoticism'. Art as an institution and literature as performance. [3] (INT) EUS2212 - Revolutions and Post-Communisms in Eastern Europe and Eurasia, 1981-2010

Twentieth-century European aesthetic, political, and social imagination from Expressionism and Dadaism to Fluxus and Happenings. Connection between aesthetics and capitalism. Impact of World Wars on art and literature, gender roles, and 'exoticism'. Art as an institution and literature as performance. [3] (INT) EUS2212 - Revolutions and Post-Communisms in Eastern Europe and Eurasia, 1981-2010Life in the Soviet Imperium. Revolutions of 1989 in Eastern Europe. Disintegration of the U.S.S.R., 1989-1991.Challenges of neoliberal transitions to free-market democracies. Post-socialist culture. Ecology and environmentalism; globalization; gender; religion and ideology; mass media; violence; ethno-nationalism; and authoritarianism. Taught in English. [3] (P)

EUS2213 - Introduction to European Intellectual Traditions: Ancient and MedievalPhilosophical, religious, and literary foundations. Texts by Homer, Virgil, Augustine, and Dante together with background from the Bible. [3] (HCA)

EUS2214 - Introduction to European Intellectual Traditions: Renaissance and ModernityGreat books of western intellectual traditions through Renaissance to Modernity. Science, technology, religion, imagination, and human individuality. Texts by Dante, Shakespeare, Cervantes, and Goethe. [3] (HCA)

EUS2220 - Religion and Politics in Modern Europe, 1648-PresentToleration in the Enlightenment; the French Revolution; antisemitism; genocide; secularism and political Islam.[3] (INT)

EUS2222 - Right-wing Populist Parties: Populism in Europe and BeyondTheoretical and historical concepts of populism. Case studies of populist parties in France, Italy, the Netherlands, Austria, Germany, Poland, and Hungary. [3] (INT)

EUS2228 - The Flight of Vulnerable Migrants to EuropeExploration of refugees' flight from persecution, and their search for protection in Europe. International Refugee Law; "refugee-creating" events in Africa and the Middle East. Geographic pathways and legal processes followed by those who have sought protection. Depictions of their plight in film, music, literature, and the visual arts. [3]

EUS2230W - European History and Culture Through Immersive GamingExperiential, game-based study of key historical moments in European history using "Reacting to the Past" (RTP) pedagogy for engaged classroom learning. Offered on a graded basis only. Serves as repeat credit for RPW3890W-01 Revolutions, offered spring 2023. [3] (HCA)

EUS2240 - Topics in European StudiesTopics of special interest on modern European culture or society. May be repeated for credit when topics vary.[3] (No AXLE credit)

EUS2260 - European CitiesEUS2800 - Pursuing Utopia: Social Justice & Romanticism in the AlpsCourse DescriptionSocial justice and literary experiments of writers who sought alternative approaches to art and society in the'neutral' Alpine settings of Europe. [3] (INT)

EUS2800 - Pursuing Utopia: Social Justice & Romanticism in the AlpsSocial justice and literary experiments of writers who sought alternative approaches to art and society in the'neutral' Alpine settings of Europe. [3] (INT)

EUS3333 - The European Refugee Experience: From Populism to Covid-19Journey of refugees towards protection in Europe; overview of international refugee law. Myriad 'refugee-creating' events, intermediaries, and challenges. [3] (INT)

EUS3850 - Independent Readings and/or ResearchIndependent readings and/or research on approved topics relating to modern European society and culture.[Variable credit: 1-3 each semester, maximum of 6 hours in 3850 and 3851 combined] (No AXLE credit)

EUS3851 - Independent Readings and/or ResearchIndependent readings and/or research on approved topics relating to modern European society and culture.[Variable credit: 1-3 each semester, maximum of 6 hours in 3850 and 3851 combined] (No AXLE credit)

EUS4960 - Senior TutorialSupervised readings, joint discussions, and independent research on a modern European topic to be selected in consultation with the director of European Studies. Open only to juniors and seniors. [3] (No AXLE credit) EUS4998 - Senior Honors Research

Supervised readings, joint discussions, and independent research on a modern European topic to be selected in consultation with the director of European Studies. Open only to juniors and seniors. [3] (No AXLE credit) EUS4998 - Senior Honors ResearchOpen only to seniors who have been admitted to the European Studies departmental honors program. [3] (No AXLE credit)

FLED3850 - Independent Study in Foreign Language EducationSemi-independent study on selected topics in foreign language education. May be repeated. Consent of instructor required. [1-3]

FLED3890 - Special Topics in Foreign Language EducationExploration of special issues or topics related to foreign language education. May be repeated for credit with change of topic. [1-3]

FREN1001 - Commons iSeminarTopics vary. General Elective credit only. [1] (No AXLE credit)

FREN1101 - Introduction to French in the WorldReading, writing, speaking, and listening through an exploration of the French-speaking world. For students who have studied little or no French. No credit for students who have earned credit for a more advanced French language course. [3] (No AXLE credit)

FREN1102 - Introduction to French in the WorldContinuation of 1101. Study of the language through an exploration of the French-speaking world. No credit for students who have earned credit for a more advanced French language course. [3] (INT)

FREN1103 - Accelerated Introduction to French in the WorldIntensive course for students who have studied one to three years of French. No credit for students who have earned credit for 1101, 1102, or a more advanced French language course. [3] (INT)

FREN1111 - First-Year Writing SeminarIndependent learning and inquiry in an environment in which students can express knowledge and defend opinions through intensive class discussion, oral presentations, and written expression. May be repeated for credit once if there is no duplication of topic, but students may earn only up to 3 credits in any 1111 course per semester of enrollment. [3; maximum of 6 credits total for all semesters of 1111] (AXLE credit category varies by section)

FREN2203 - Intermediate French Language and CulturesFrench and Francophone cultures through readings, film, and discussion. Designed for students who have completed elementary-level French. No credit for students who have earned credit for a more advanced French language course. Prerequisite: 1102 or 1103. [3] (INT)

FREN2501W - French Composition and GrammarPrerequisite: 2203 or the equivalent. No graduate credit. No credit for students who have earned credit for a more advanced French language course. [3] (INT)

FREN2611 - PhoneticsMethodical comparison of French and English sounds. Correct formation of French sounds; oral exercises and aural training. Prerequisite: 2501W. [3] (INT)

FREN2614 - Advanced Conversational FrenchEmphasis on idiomatic usage and strategies for oral communication. Prerequisite: 2501W. [3] (P)

FREN2700 - Great French and Francophone Works in English TranslationMiddle Ages to modernity. Emergence of the modern nation-state and liberal ideals of the eighteenth-century Enlightenment; French Revolution and modernist movements in the arts. Troubadours, Romance of Rose,Racine, Voltaire, Diderot, Rousseau, Hugo, Cézanne, Flaubert, Césaire, Condé, Djebar, Sembéne. [3] (INT) FREN3001 - Texts and Contexts: Middle Ages to the Enlightenment

Racine, Voltaire, Diderot, Rousseau, Hugo, Cézanne, Flaubert, Césaire, Condé, Djebar, Sembéne. [3] (INT) FREN3001 - Texts and Contexts: Middle Ages to the EnlightenmentLiterary works from 500 to 1800 in historical context. Analysis and discussion of a variety of texts (novels, plays, poems and non-fiction) as well as social and cultural history. Not open to students who have earned credit for 3101. Prerequisite: 2501W. [3] (INT)

FREN3002 - Texts and Contexts: Revolution to the PresentLiterary works from 1800 to the present in historical context. Analysis of a variety of texts (novels, plays, poems and non-fiction) as well as social and cultural history. Not open to students who have earned credit for 3102.Prerequisite: 2501W. [3] (INT)

FREN3111 - French for BusinessSpecialized vocabulary of business terms, business letters, and exercises in comprehension and translation.Prerequisite: 2501W. [3] (INT)

FREN3112 - Medical French in Intercultural ContextsAdvanced conversation course dealing with medical issues in the Francophone world. Prerequisites: 2501W. [3]

FREN3113 - Advanced French GrammarA systematic review with particular attention to morphology and syntax. Prerequisite: 2501W. [3] (INT) FREN3114 - French for Law and Diplomacy in a Global Context

A systematic review with particular attention to morphology and syntax. Prerequisite: 2501W. [3] (INT) FREN3114 - French for Law and Diplomacy in a Global ContextStructural differences between the legal systems of the United States and the Francophone world. Governmental structures, jurisprudence, international governing organizations, and international law. Careers and professional life in the legal field. Offered on a graded basis only. Prerequisite: 2501W. [3] (INT)

FREN3185W - The Refugee Experience in France and ItalyFrench and Italian culture, migration, global studies, refugees. Legal issues, current events, and cultural representation of vulnerable migrants. Taught in English. [3] (P)

FREN3222 - The Early Modern NovelDevelopment of the novel as a genre in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries; its changing social, intellectual, and political context. Prerequisite: 2501W. [3] (HCA)

FREN3224 - Media MedievalismsPre-modern French society through medieval literature and history. Study of the imagined society recreated in modern medieval and Renaissance "faires," films, novels, and video games. Prerequisite: 2501W. [3] (HCA) FREN3230 - French and Francophone Cinema

Pre-modern French society through medieval literature and history. Study of the imagined society recreated in modern medieval and Renaissance "faires," films, novels, and video games. Prerequisite: 2501W. [3] (HCA) FREN3230 - French and Francophone CinemaThe themes and art of film in France and the French-speaking world. Offered in French at Vanderbilt in France and in English at Nashville. When offered in English, this course does not count toward the minor, and writing must be done in French to count toward the major. [3] (INT)

FREN3232 - Introduction to Francophone LiteratureThe geopolitical, linguistic, and literary dimensions of the notion "La Francophonie." Readings will be chosen from fictional and nonfictional works from Africa, Canada, the Caribbean, countries bordering the Indian Ocean, and Vietnam. Prerequisite: 2501W. [3] (P)

FREN3233 - Francophone Caribbean LiteratureMajor literary works of Haiti, Martinique, Guadeloupe, and French Guyana. Historical, geographic, and cultural context. Comparative approaches to the Hispanic and Anglophone Caribbean. Prerequisite: 2501W. [3] (INT) FREN3234 - Contemporary Francophone Press

Major literary works of Haiti, Martinique, Guadeloupe, and French Guyana. Historical, geographic, and cultural context. Comparative approaches to the Hispanic and Anglophone Caribbean. Prerequisite: 2501W. [3] (INT) FREN3234 - Contemporary Francophone PressCritical study of the Francophone press (print, television, radio, internet) in Europe, Africa, Canada, Louisiana, Islands in the Caribbean and Indian Ocean (Madagascar, Seychelles). Current issues in the media. Comparisons with the U.S. press. Prerequisite: 2501W. [3] (HCA)

FREN3332 - Popular Music and Social Change in France and the Francophone WorldCulture and history. Popular musical production in France, Canada, Haiti, the Caribbean, the Maghreb, and Africa. Granular analyses of musical and lyrical content; how popular music both spearheaded and reflected social issues and change, especially beginning in the 1960s. Prerequisite 2501W. [3] (INT)

FREN3620 - Age of Louis XIVLiterature and society in the reign of Louis XIV. Authors include Mme de Lafayette, La Fontaine, Moli√®re, Pascal, Racine, and Mme de S√©vign√©. Prerequisite: 2501W. [3] (HCA)

FREN3621 - Enlightenment and RevolutionMajor writers of the eighteenth century, including Montesquieu, Voltaire, Rousseau, Diderot; literature of the Revolution. [3] (HCA)

FREN3622 - Identity and Family in French & Francophone CultureFamily in relation to identity, history, and memory in France. Relationship between the individual and the community. "Self-inventing" individuals against families and communities. Key contemporary French and Francophone texts and films. Prerequisite: 2501W. [3] (INT)

FREN3634 - Parisian Geographies: Paris in 19th and 20th century Art and LiteratureThe changing physical landscape and cultural significance of Paris in literature, painting, photography, and film of the 19th and 20th centuries. No credit for students who have earned credit for 3891 offered Fall 2018.Prerequisite 2501W. [3] (HCA)

FREN3730 - The Beat Generation's French ConnectionThe Beats' ties to Paris and to Quebec through French-Canadian Jack Kerouac. Antonin Artaud, Jean Genet, Arthur Rimbaud, and Marquis de Sade. Prerequisite: 2501W. [3] (INT)

FREN3850 - Independent StudyContent varies according to the needs of the individual student. Primarily designed to cover pertinent material not otherwise available in the regular curriculum. May be repeated for a total of 12 credits over a four-semester period, but students may earn only up to 3 credits per semester of enrollment. [1-3; maximum of 12 credits total for four semesters of FREN 3850] (No AXLE credit)

FREN3880 - Internship Training in FranceUnder faculty supervision, students intern in public or private organizations, and complete research and readings. Offered on a pass/fail basis only and must be taken concurrently with 3881. Corequisite: 3881. [1] (No AXLE credit)

FREN3881 - Internship Readings and Research in FranceUnder faculty supervision, students intern in public or private organizations, and complete research and readings. Must be taken concurrently with 3880. Corequisite: 3880. [3] (No AXLE credit)

FREN3891 - Special Topics in TraditionsTopics vary. Prerequisite: 2501W. May be repeated for credit more than once if there is no duplication in topic.Students may enroll in more than one section of this course each semester. [3] (No AXLE credit)

FREN3892 - Special Topics in Communications and IntersectionsTopics vary. Prerequisite: 2501W. May be repeated for credit more than once if there is no duplication in topic.Students may enroll in more than one section of this course each semester. [3] (No AXLE credit)

FREN4023 - The African NovelThe postcolonial Francophone novel of Subsaharan Africa illustrating topics such as tradition and modernity, the identity of Africa, the representation of women, and the ideology of language. Prerequisite: 2501W. [3] (INT) FREN4025 - From Carnival to the "Carnivalesque"

The postcolonial Francophone novel of Subsaharan Africa illustrating topics such as tradition and modernity, the identity of Africa, the representation of women, and the ideology of language. Prerequisite: 2501W. [3] (INT) FREN4025 - From Carnival to the "Carnivalesque"Carnival themes of transgression, the grotesque, feasting, and the "fool." Rabelais to contemporary works.Offered on a graded basis only. Prerequisite: 2501W. [3] (P)

FREN4027 - Emile Zola: From Naturalist Novels to Social ActivismThe author's method of researching subject matter and style of writing. "Environmental" influences of violence, prostitution, and alcoholism. The idea of the "public intellectual." Prerequisite: 2501W. [3] (HCA) FREN4029 - Twentieth-Century French Literature

The author's method of researching subject matter and style of writing. "Environmental" influences of violence, prostitution, and alcoholism. The idea of the "public intellectual." Prerequisite: 2501W. [3] (HCA) FREN4029 - Twentieth-Century French LiteratureCritical readings of representative works organized thematically with emphasis on their contextual and intertextual relationships. Prerequisite: 2501W. [3] (HCA)

FREN4222 - Terrorism and Contemporary TheaterReligious and ideological terrorism in Francophone contemporary theater (North African and Middle-Eastern dramaturges). Theatrical nature of terrorism; spectacle as predominant motif; analysis of theatrical mise-en-scene. Cult of martyrdom; notions of sacrifice, shame, duty and honor through recent historical events. [3] (INT) FREN4232 - Literature and Law

Religious and ideological terrorism in Francophone contemporary theater (North African and Middle-Eastern dramaturges). Theatrical nature of terrorism; spectacle as predominant motif; analysis of theatrical mise-en-scene. Cult of martyrdom; notions of sacrifice, shame, duty and honor through recent historical events. [3] (INT) FREN4232 - Literature and LawConfessions, murder, argumentation, interpretation, and the representation of "the criminal" in literary and legal texts from traditional French writings. Offered on a graded basis only. Prerequisite: 2501W. [3] (P) FREN4234 - Dangerous Bodies: Women in 19th Century Art and Literature

Confessions, murder, argumentation, interpretation, and the representation of "the criminal" in literary and legal texts from traditional French writings. Offered on a graded basis only. Prerequisite: 2501W. [3] (P) FREN4234 - Dangerous Bodies: Women in 19th Century Art and LiteratureNineteenth century novels and poetry with an emphasis on representations of the female body. Painting and photography. No credit for students who have earned credit for 3891 offered Fall 2017. Prerequisite: French 2501W. [3] (HCA)

FREN4320 - French Women and FeminismsFeminist themes in twentieth-century French literature and criticism. Authors include Beauvoir, Duras, Sarraute, Irigaray, Cixous. Prerequisite: 2501W. [3] (P)

FREN4430 - Minority Issues & Immigration in FranceConflict between Jews and Arab-Muslims in France through analyses of historical accounts, news reports, and literary and cultural manifestations. From the origins of Zionism (~1885), to the Holocaust, and to the Intifadas of 1987 and 2000 and the Charlie Hebdo and kosher supermarket massacres of 2015 in Paris. Prerequisite 2501W. [3] (P)

FREN4432 - French Intellectual HistoryFrom Montaigne to Sartre and beyond. Critical discourses and major philosophical texts. Prerequisite: 2501W.[3] (HCA)

FREN4998 - Senior Honors Thesis[3] (No AXLE credit)

FREN4999 - Senior Honors Thesis[3] (No AXLE credit)

GSS1001 - Commons iSeminarTopics vary. General Elective credit only. [1] (No AXLE credit)

GSS1111 - First-Year Writing SeminarIndependent learning and inquiry in an environment in which students can express knowledge and defend opinions through intensive class discussion, oral presentations, and written expression. May be repeated for credit once if there is no duplication of topic, but students may earn only up to 3 credits in any 1111 course per semester of enrollment. [3; maximum of 6 credits total for all semesters of 1111] (AXLE credit category varies by section)

GSS1150 - Sex and Gender in Everyday LifeSex and gender roles in culture and society. Gender, race, and class. Women and men in literature, art, culture, politics, institutions. Repeat credit for students who have completed 1150W. [3] (P)

GSS1150W - Sex and Gender in Everyday LifeSex and gender roles in culture and society. Gender, race, and class. Women and men in literature, art, culture, politics, institutions. Repeat credit for students who have completed 1150. [3] (P)

GSS1160 - Sex and SocietyHistorical, cultural, and social contexts of sexual diversity, discrimination, and sexual violence. Understanding the centrality of sexuality to identity; challenging harmful modes of sexual expression; developing critical awareness of sex and sexuality. [3] (P)

GSS1160W - Sex and SocietyHistorical, cultural, and social contexts of sexual diversity, discrimination, and sexual violence. Understanding the centrality of sexuality to identity; challenging harmful modes of sexual expression; developing critical awareness of sex and sexuality. Repeat credit for students who have completed 1160. [3] (P)

GSS1272 - Feminism and FilmImages of gender and race; techniques, sound, lighting, cinematography in relation in gender. Prerequisite: 1150 or 1150W or 1160. [3] (US)

GSS1273 - Gender and the CityGender and urban processes; spatial and social organization of the city. Geography of gender relations. Gender, sex, race/ethnicity, class, and ability as spatial power relations. [3] (P)

GSS2225 - Women in Popular CultureGender differentiation in popular culture and mass-market products. Portrayal of women in movies, print, music, and the Internet. The sources and effects of these portrayals. Women as both consumers and the consumed.Prerequisite: 1150 or 1150W or 1160. [3] (HCA)

GSS2234 - Women in JudaismJudaism and feminism. Women in the Hebrew Bible, Jewish law, natural philosophy, and history. Case studies in Jewish medieval and modern contexts; problems of assimilation and cultural specificity in modern society. [3]

GSS2235 - Women in IsraelStatus and experiences of Jewish and non-Jewish women living in Israel. Religion and the law; Jewish and non-Jewish minorities; women and the military; women's health; violence against women; the Palestinian/Israeli conflict. [3] (INT)

GSS2236 - Women in Judaism II: Recent Jewish FeminismTwenty-first century developments in Jewish thought regarding gender, sex, and sexuality. Methodologies by which scholars grapple with regnant, "traditional" Jewish sources and norms of interpretation and practice. Race, class, and disability; role of gender in Jewish ethics, theology, ritual, ethnography, and textual interpretation.Prerequisite: GSS 2234 or JS 2710W. [3] (P)

GSS2240 - Introduction to Women's HealthHow culture influences women's health, body image, self esteem. Issues include fertility control and child bearing, medical innovations to detect disease, alternative therapies, psychological well-being, sexuality, physical and sexual abuse. Impact of politics on health options for women. [3] (P)

GSS2242 - Women Who KillExamination of classical and contemporary representations of women who kill. [3] (P)

GSS2243 - Sociologies of Men and MasculinityTraditional and emerging perspectives on masculinity and male gender-roles. Emphasis on relationship between social forces and males' everyday experiences across the life-span. Prerequisite: 1150 or 1150W or 1160. [3] (P) GSS2244 - The Body, Culture, and Feminism

Traditional and emerging perspectives on masculinity and male gender-roles. Emphasis on relationship between social forces and males' everyday experiences across the life-span. Prerequisite: 1150 or 1150W or 1160. [3] (P) GSS2244 - The Body, Culture, and FeminismThe body as a cultural, social, and historical construction. Western culture and narratives of "normalcy" and their impact on identity and representation. Body image and eating disorders. Cultural politics of size, weight, and shape. Disability. Cosmetic surgery. [3] (P)

GSS2249 - Women and Humor in the Age of TelevisionThe period 1950 to present. Television variety shows, sitcoms, and stand-up comedy as media for promoting women's humor and feminism. Comedy as a means of dealing with difficult personal and social issues.Prerequisite: 1150 or 1150W or 1160. [3] (HCA)

GSS2252 - Sex and Scandals in LiteratureFrom the eighteenth century to the present. Women's and men's disorderly conduct as represented in literary texts. Charlotte Rowson, Kate Chopin, Edith Wharton, Henry James, and Toni Morrison. [3] (HCA)

GSS2254 - Feminist FictionsFrom the nineteenth century to the present. Feminist ideas and ideals as represented in literary texts. Kate Chopin, Edith Wharton, Virginia Woolf, Alice Walker, and Margaret Atwood. [3] (HCA)

GSS2256 - Literary LesbiansFrom the nineteenth century to the present. How girls' and women's intimacies are monitored and policed in literature and culture. Impact of race, class, religion, and disability on expression and reception of relationships.[3] (HCA)

GSS2259 - Reading and Writing LivesInterdisciplinary exploration of life-stories as narratives. Strategies of self-representation and interpretation, with particular attention to women. Includes fiction, biography, autobiography, history, ethnography, and the writing of life-story narratives. Repeat credit for students who have completed 2259W. [3] (HCA)

GSS2259W - Reading and Writing LivesInterdisciplinary exploration of life-stories as narratives. Strategies of self-representation and interpretation, with particular attention to women. Includes fiction, biography, autobiography, history, ethnography, and the writing of life-story narratives. Repeat credit for students who have completed 2259. [3] (HCA)

GSS2262 - Gender and EthicsReligious worldviews connected to moral traditions. Epistemological and ethical systems and their relationship to gender and patriarchy. Social construction of gender; violence against women; feminism; and difference. [3]

GSS2267 - Seminar on Gender and ViolenceIn-depth study of violence against women, with a service-learning component in a community setting. Topics include domestic abuse, rape, sexual harassment, pornography, and global violence. Focus on problems and potential solutions, examining violence on a societal, institutional, and individual level, interrogating the"personal as political," and exposing power structures that shape our communities. [3] (P) GSS2268 - Gender, Race, Justice, and the Environment

"personal as political," and exposing power structures that shape our communities. [3] (P) GSS2268 - Gender, Race, Justice, and the EnvironmentGender and racial aspects of environmental degradation. Risk, activism, health and illness, policy and politics.Prerequisite: 1150 or 1150W or 1160. [3] (SBS)

GSS2270 - Ecofeminism: Theory, Politics, and ActionInterconnections among the exploitation of nature, the oppression of women, and the abuse of resources that have led to the current global ecological crisis. [3] (SBS)

GSS2301 - Gender, Murder, War: Detective Fiction 1920-1950Literary analysis in historical context. Sex, gender, and sexuality; war. [3] (HCA)

GSS2610 - Womanism in Global ContextSurvey of global Womanist (Black Feminist) theory and praxis. Race, class, sexuality, spirituality, and activism.Controversies over female bodies. [3] (INT)

GSS2612 - Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and Transgender StudiesIntroductory study of sexual identity, queer theory, relationships, politics. [3] (HCA)

GSS2613 - Compulsory CouplehoodFrom the nineteenth century to the present. Legal and societal implications of marriage. Marginalization of the single person. Different gendered stereotypes of the uncoupled adult, including the bachelor and the spinster.Non-normative forms of kinship and relationships. Primarily United States with global perspectives. Scholarly and pop-cultural texts. [3] (P)

GSS2614 - Cowboys, Gangsters, and Drag Kings: Introduction to Critical Masculinity StudiesCritical examination of representations of masculinity in patriarchal societies. Constructed nature of masculinity in relation to race, sexuality, class, national, and religious identifications. Historical, sociological, literary, cinematic, and visual art analyses. Prerequisite: 1150 or 1150W or 1160. [3] (HCA)

GSS2615 - Transgender Lives in Literature and FilmGlobal study of transgender representation in film and literature. Cultural theory approach, utilizing work from the fields of transgender, queer, feminist, and disability studies. [3] (HCA)

GSS3030 - Feminist Disability StudiesDisability through a feminist lens. Changes in the meaning of disability over time and across cultures.Intersectional focus on gender, race, ethnicity, class, age, sexuality, and nationality. Embodiment, eugenics, performance, social movements, and violence. [3] (P)

GSS3201 - Women and Gender in Transnational ContextGender as a social construction. Feminist critiques of knowledge, family and work, sexuality, health and medicine, and the women's movement. The future of feminism in global context. Prerequisite: 1150 or 1150W or 1160. [3] (P)

GSS3246W - Women's Rights, Women's WrongsIntellectual and theoretical foundations for contemporary feminist theory and politics in the United States, based upon works by nineteenth- and twentieth-century authors. Prerequisite: 1150 or 1150W or 1160. [3] (US) GSS3250 - Contemporary Women's Movements

Intellectual and theoretical foundations for contemporary feminist theory and politics in the United States, based upon works by nineteenth- and twentieth-century authors. Prerequisite: 1150 or 1150W or 1160. [3] (US) GSS3250 - Contemporary Women's MovementsRecent feminist history. The origins and parameters of women's movements from the 1960's to the present.Repeat credit for students who have completed 3250W. Prerequisite: 1150 or 1150W or 1160. [3] (P)

GSS3250W - Contemporary Women's MovementsRecent feminist history. The origins and parameters of women's movements from the 1960's to the present.Prerequisite: 1150 or 1150W or 1160. [3] (P)

GSS3265 - Human Rights in ActivismRole of human rights in struggles against injustice. Identification of key problems of injustice addressed by a human rights framework. Problems with human rights as a tool for activism. Discussion in contemporary politics.Intellectual and legal traditions that have developed around human rights. No credit for students who have earned credit for PSCI 3896 section 01 offered fall 2016. Offered on a graded basis only. [3] (P)

GSS3271 - Feminist Legal TheoryTheoretical issues about the interaction between law and gender. Application of feminist analysis and perspective to law relating to family, work, criminal law, reproductive freedom, pornography, and sexual harassment. Prerequisite: 11150 or 1150W or 1160. [3] (P)

GSS3273 - Seminar on Psychoanalysis and FeminismHistorical and contemporary perspectives on the long and ambivalent relationship between psychoanalysis and feminism. Trauma, hysteria, narcissism, gender, and the family. Prerequisite: 1150 or 1150W or 1160. [3] (P) GSS3281 - Globalization and Policy-Making

Historical and contemporary perspectives on the long and ambivalent relationship between psychoanalysis and feminism. Trauma, hysteria, narcissism, gender, and the family. Prerequisite: 1150 or 1150W or 1160. [3] (P) GSS3281 - Globalization and Policy-MakingWestern historical conceptualizations of the state. Socio-political contexts. Prerequisite: 1150 or 1150W or 1160.[3] (INT)

GSS3301 - Reproductive Justice in Transnational ContextsWomen of color and human rights movement for bodily autonomy and comprehensive reproductive rights in the United States. How activists around the world use different strategies to promote sexual and reproductive human rights. How opponents attack abortion rights in US and globally. Not open to students who have earned credit for GSS 3201, section 01, offered Spring 2022. [3] (P)

GSS3302 - Domestic Work and Gender Inequality TransnationallyGender, race, ethnicity, dis/ability, class, and nationality shape the value of domestic labor and who performs it.Migration patterns across Europe, Asia, and North and South America. Domestic workers' fight for labor rights.[3] (INT)

GSS3303 - Feminist Disability StudiesGender, disability, and the body. Theories of disability, performance arts, eugenics, disability rights movement, and technology. Intersectional analysis of disability alongside race, ethnicity, sexuality, and class. Memoir, history, qualitative research, and literary analysis. [3] (P)

GSS3304 - Gender, Power, and JusticeTheoretical, historical, and cultural analysis of power structures and politics; analysis of activist and academic responses to contemporary political questions. [3]

GSS3305 - Gender and Sexuality in Times of PandemicIntegration of science and medicine to the social construction of race, gender and identity. Interconnections with national security, economic growth, and natural risks: sex, death and illness. Challenges to gender and sexual justice by infectious diseases. Historical and literary research; sex, sexuality and gender during times of disease. Expressions, regulations, and resistance of sex, sexuality, and gender during medical/scientific crises. [3]

GSS3306 - Reproductive Justice: The Politics of Reproduction, Family, and LibertyHistorical constructions of reproduction with attention to race, class, gender, sexuality, and dis/ability. Social constructs of family, motherhood, pregnancy, and parenting. Rights, health, agency, and freedom in the reproductive justice framework. [3] (P)

GSS3307 - Racial JusticeMajor contemporary racial justice debates. Theories of racial justice; inclusion of women of color, LGBT, and trans persons of color. Articulations of race, racism and pathways to racial justice. Intersectional feminist thinkers and queer theorists. [3] (P)

GSS3308 - Gender, Race, and Urban MobilitiesPerspectives on and influences of gender and race on mobility, urban and transit planning, and policy.Methodological skills to study modes of transit. Transportation innovation across the Global North and South. [3]

GSS3309 - Gender, Justice, and the Urban EnvironmentTransforming urban environments. Systems of power and privilege; inequalities such as gender, race, sexuality, ethnicity, geographic location, and other dynamics that influence climate crisis response. Structures of oppression in the city via infrastructures, policies, and programs. Feminist, Black, Chicana, and decolonial methodologies [3] (P)

GSS3310 - Race, Citizenship, and Belonging in the United StatesCitizenship and race, gender, sexuality, ethnicity, religion, ability. Citizenship through lenses of feminist scholarship, critical race theory, human geography, postcolonial theory, queer theory, and critical ethnic studies. Contemporary issues in U.S. context. [3] (P)

GSS3311 - Latinx and Latin American Feminist GeographiesLatinx geographies; colonialism and racial capitalism; the production of space; critical feminist, black, Indigenous, and queer lenses; collective struggles such as environmental justice, race and immigration, gender and labor, mobility, and territories. [3] (P)

GSS3405 - Mass Incarceration and Abolition FeminismFeminists as theorists and activists in prison abolition. Decentering the male as the embodiment of mass incarceration. Sexual assault to prison pipeline. Effects of carceral gendering on black women's lives. Economic, psychological, and physiological costs of the emotional labor women provide to men in prison. Nexus of interpersonal and state violence in black women's lives. Kimberle Crenshaw's concept of intersectionality as illuminating the carceral power formation. Not open to students who have completed 3892 section 01 offered spring 2021. [3] (P)

GSS3605 - Oral Histories: Voting While Black and Female in NashvilleCentennial of the ratification of the 19th amendment. Jim Crow laws, voter suppression laws, gerrymandering.Voting experiences, opinions, and struggles of African American women in Nashville. Civic engagement and socializing conditions that create political identity. Intergenerational transmission of stories shaping the contemporary voter. [3] (P)

GSS3850 - Independent StudyA program of reading and research for advanced students in an area of women's and gender studies arranged in consultation with an adviser. Prerequisite: 1150 or 1150W. May be repeated for a total of 6 credits if there is no duplication in topic, but students may earn only up to 3 credits per semester of enrollment. [1-3; maximum of 6

GSS3880 - Internship TrainingUnder faculty supervision, students gain experience combining theoretical and practical work in a project related to social change and focused on women, feminism, or gender. Legislative, community, educational, or non-profit settings. Internship plan developed between student and faculty sponsor, with approval of Women's and Gender Studies program director. A thorough report and research paper are submitted at the end of the semester. Must be taken on a Pass/Fail basis only and must be taken concurrently with 3882 and/or 3883.These hours may not be included in the minimum hours required for the women's and gender studies major.Prerequisite: 3201 and one other 2000-level (or higher) Women's and Gender Studies course, and a 2.90 grade point average. Corequisite: 3882 and/or 3883. [1-9] (No AXLE credit)

GSS3882 - Internship ReadingsUnder faculty supervision, students gain experience combining theoretical and practical work in a project related to social change and focused on women, feminism, or gender. Legislative, community, educational, or non-profit settings. Internship plan developed between student and faculty sponsor, with approval of Women's and Gender Studies program director. A thorough report and research paper are submitted at the end of the semester. Prerequisite: 3201 and one other 3000-level Women's and Gender Studies course, and a 2.90 grade point average. Corequisite: 3880. [Variable credit: 1-3] (No AXLE credit)

GSS3883 - Internship ResearchUnder faculty supervision, students gain experience combining theoretical and practical work in a project related to social change and focused on women, feminism, or gender. Legislative, community, educational, or non-profit settings. Internship plan developed between student and faculty sponsor, with approval of Women's and Gender Studies program director. A thorough report and research paper are submitted at the end of the semester. Prerequisite: 3201 and one other 2000-level (or higher) Women's and Gender Studies course, and a 2.90 grade point average. Corequisite: 3880. [Variable credit: 1-3] (No AXLE credit)

GSS3891 - Special Topics: Topics in Gender, Culture, and RepresentationTopics vary. Prerequisite: 1150 or 1150W or 1160. May be repeated for credit more than once if there is no duplication in topic. Students may enroll in more than one section of this course each semester. [3] (No AXLE

GSS3892 - Special Topics: Topics in Gender, Society, and Political EconomyTopics vary. Prerequisite: 1150 or 1150W or 1160. May be repeated for credit more than once if there is no duplication in topic. Students may enroll in more than one section of this course each semester. [3] (No AXLE

GSS3893 - Selected TopicsTopics vary. Prerequisite: 1150 or 1150W or 1160. May be repeated for credit more than once if there is no duplication in topic. Students may enroll in more than one section of this course each semester. [3] (No AXLE

GSS4950 - Capstone ColloquiumSeminar and workshop intended for immersion enrichment culminating in individual projects. [3]

GSS4960 - Senior SeminarAdvanced reading and research. Prerequisite: 1150 or 1150W or 1160. [3] (No AXLE credit)

GSS4970 - Sexing the Archive: Research Methods in Women's and Gender StudiesConducting research through a feminist and queer lens. Archival research; examining oral histories using specialized Vanderbilt resources, as well as other local and online archives. Offered on a graded basis only.Prerequisite: 1150, 1150W, or 1160. [3] (HCA)

GSS4998 - Honors ResearchReading and research under the guidance of a faculty supervisor. Consent of both the faculty supervisor and the director of Women's and Gender Studies program required. Open only to honors candidates. May be repeated for a total of 6 credits if there is no duplication in topic. [3-6; maximum of 6 credits total for all semesters of WGS 4998] (No AXLE credit)

GSS4999 - Honors ThesisOpen only to seniors in the Women's and Gender Studies Honors Program. May be repeated for a total of 6credits if there is no duplication in topic. [3-6; maximum of 6 credits total for all semesters of WGS 4999] (No AXLE credit)

GER1001 - Commons iSeminarTopics vary. General Elective credit only. [1] (No AXLE credit)

GER1101 - Elementary German IDevelopment of the four language skills of reading, listening, speaking, and writing. No credit for students who have earned credit for a more advanced German language course. [3] (No AXLE credit)

GER1102 - Elementary German IIContinuation of 1101. No credit for students who have earned credit for a more advanced German language course. Prerequisite: 1101. [3] (INT)

GER1105 - Beginning German for Singers and Collaborative PianistsBasic German language skills engaging the art song (Lieder) repertoire. Structures of German through close readings, translations, and analyses of the Lieder texts within their socio-cultural context. [3] (INT) GER1111 - First-Year Writing Seminar

Basic German language skills engaging the art song (Lieder) repertoire. Structures of German through close readings, translations, and analyses of the Lieder texts within their socio-cultural context. [3] (INT) GER1111 - First-Year Writing SeminarIndependent learning and inquiry in an environment in which students can express knowledge and defend opinions through intensive class discussion, oral presentations, and written expression. May be repeated for credit once if there is no duplication of topic, but students may earn only up to 3 credits in any 1111 course per semester of enrollment. [3; maximum of 6 credits total for all semesters of 1111] (AXLE credit category varies by section)

GER1442 - War on ScreenRepresentations of World War II and the fight against Nazi Germany in Hollywood and other cinemas,contemporary video games, television, and installation art. How current modes of warfare and the global war on terror have changed the conventions of depicting war. Taught in English. [3] (HCA)

GER1482 - Borders and Crossings: German Literature and Culture from Romanticism to the PresentGER2201 - Intermediate German ICourse DescriptionIntensive review of German grammar as a basis for reading, conversation, and composition. Texts anddiscussions address issues in contemporary German society. No credit for students who have earned credit for a more advanced German language course. Prerequisite: 1102. [3] (INT)

GER2201 - Intermediate German IIntensive review of German grammar as a basis for reading, conversation, and composition. Texts anddiscussions address issues in contemporary German society. No credit for students who have earned credit for a more advanced German language course. Prerequisite: 1102. [3] (INT)

GER2202 - Intermediate German IIPractice in reading, listening, speaking, and writing. Short stories, one longer work (Kafka), and discussions examine aspects of modern life from a German perspective. No credit for students who have earned credit for a more advanced German language course. Prerequisite: 2201. [3] (INT)

GER2217 - Advanced GrammarStudy of word formation and sentence structure in modern German, supplemented by contemporary readings, with discussion. Not open to students who have participated in the Regensburg exchange program. [3] (INT) GER2400 - Berlin: History, Culture, and Art

Study of word formation and sentence structure in modern German, supplemented by contemporary readings, with discussion. Not open to students who have participated in the Regensburg exchange program. [3] (INT) GER2400 - Berlin: History, Culture, and ArtMaymester: visits to museums, site of the former Berlin Wall, Holocaust Memorial, and observation of German parliament in session. Daily reading and excursions. Taught in English [3] (INT)

GER2432 - Soccer: Media, Art, and SocietyRelationship of soccer to political power, globalization, mass media, gender, migration, national identity, and transnational commerce. History of the game and its tactics. Representations of soccer in various artistic media such as literature, film, poetry, and video art. Taught in English. Not open to students who have earned credit for GER 1111.09. [3] (INT)

GER2440 - History of German ThoughtFrom the Enlightenment to the present. German philosophy and critical theory in their social and political context. History of German intellectual movements. German thought as part of German culture. Taught in English. [3] (HCA)

GER2441 - Great German Works in EnglishGerman literature and culture from 1750 to present. The relationship of culture and history, changing notions of individual and community, modern sensibilities expressed in various genres. Goethe, Nietzsche, Freud, Kafka, and Jelinek. Taught in English. [3] (INT)

GER2443 - A History of German FilmA curated presentation of the history of German cinema with special emphasis on its sociocultural contexts and artistic achievements. Discussion will include pertinent theories of cinematography and cinematic narration.Taught in English. [3] (INT)

GER2444 - German Fairy Tales: From Brothers Grimm to Walt DisneyThe German fairy tale tradition and its role in American culture. Taught in English. [3] (INT)

GER2445 - Nazi Cinema: The Manipulation of Mass CultureNazi manipulation of mass culture through film (propaganda, musicals, westerns). Some comparison with American film of the era, additional examination of "fascist" aesthetic legacy in American culture today. Taught in English. [3] (P)

GER2551 - Topics: Pre-18th Century Culture and Literature (ENGL)German-speaking cultures and their literatures from 8th to the early 18th century. Taught in English. May be repeated for credit if there is no duplication in topic. [3] (INT)

GER2552 - Topics: 18th and 19th C Culture and Literature (ENGL)Literature, philosophy, art, and politics, 1750-1914, of German-speaking cultures. Taught in English. May be repeated for credit if there is no duplication in topic. [3] (INT)

GER2553 - Topics: 20th and 21st Century Culture and Literature (ENGL)Literature, history, aesthetics, and politics in German-speaking cultures from Dada to the present. Taught in English. May be repeated for credit if there is no duplication in topic. [3] (INT)

GER2554 - Topics in Visual Culture and Media (ENGL)Cinema, media arts, visual culture, and media history of German-speaking cultures from pre-digital to the digital age. Taught in English. May be repeated for credit if there is no duplication in topic. [3] (HCA)

GER2555 - Topics in German Studies (ENGL)Seminal aspects of German literature, culture, and civilization through interdisciplinary focus. Taught in English.May be repeated for credit if there is no duplication in topic. [3] (INT)

GER2556 - Topics in Intellectual History (ENGL)Major trends and figures from the Enlightenment to the contemporary age. Taught in English. May be repeated for credit if there is no duplication in topic. [3] (HCA)

GER2557 - Topics in Genre (ENGL)Main genres of German literature and culture. Relationship between genres and the social, political, and cultural developments that lead to their formation and transformation. Taught in English. May be repeated for credit if there is no duplication in topic. [3] (HCA)

GER2563 - Twentieth-Century GermanyThe turbulent history of Germany, as it went from authoritarian state to volatile democracy, to National Socialist dictatorship, to divided country, and to reunification. Special emphasis placed on the Nazi dictatorship, its origins and legacy. [3] (INT)

GER2570 - The HolocaustThe history of the Holocaust: its origins, development, and its legacy in the context of Germany and European history. [3] (INT)

GER2581 - Nineteenth-Century PhilosophyA study of selected themes and writings from nineteenth-century European philosophers. [3] (INT)

GER2585 - Critical TheoryThe Frankfurt School; mass culture, ideology, and modernism in the arts; the disenchantment of reason; alienation and fascism; the prospects for experience and political critique. Readings include Adorno, Horkheimer, Marcuse, Benjamin, and Habermas. [3] (HCA)

GER2745 - Radical Art: The Avant-Garde RevolutionIntroduction to experimental art-both verbal and visual-in the 1910s-1930s. Movements studied: Cubism, Futurism, Dadaism, Suprematism, Constructivism, and Surrealism through the avant-garde's engagement with various genres and media: the manifesto, performance, sound and image poetry, painting, photomontage, artist's book, magazine, film and architecture. Taught in English. [3] (INT)

GER3201 - Advanced German: Germany TodayGerman culture, politics, social issues. News media and current events. Development of advanced written and oral communication skills. Offered on a graded basis only. Prerequisite: 2202. [3] (INT)

GER3202W - Advanced German: Reading, Writing, AnalysisSubtleties of style. Different vocabularies of textual and cultural criticism. Analysis of wide range of text genres and cultural materials. Offered on graded basis only. Prerequisite: 2202. [3] (INT)

GER3211 - German for the ProfessionsThe culture of the German business community; differences that hinder communication between German-speakers and non-German-speakers in the business setting; development of aural, oral, and written skills.Business practices in German-speaking countries: advertising and marketing strategies, letters, vitae, phone calls, and personal interviews. Prerequisites: 2202. [3] (INT)

GER3323 - From Language to LiteratureContinuing practice in reading, listening, speaking, and writing; emphasis on literary terminology and techniques for critical reading of German. Recommended as preparation for more advanced literary study, prose, poetry, and drama. Prerequisite: 2320. [3] (HCA)

GER3333 - Special OfferingTopics vary. [3]

GER3343 - The Aesthetics of ViolenceThe "dark" side of imagination in twentieth-century German literature including history and theory of modern art, emphasis on literary representation, mutual influences between aesthetic reflection and political action. No knowledge of German required. [3] (P)

GER3344 - German-Jewish Women WritersExamination of themes, forms, and sociocultural issues shaping the work of German-Jewish women writers from the Enlightenment to the present. Readings and discussions in English. [3] (HCA)

GER3345 - Love and FriendshipConcepts of life and friendship, Greek antiquity to Romanticism, modern and postmodern times. Philosophical and literary texts, letters, and essays. Taught in English. [3] (No AXLE credit)

GER3375 - Art and Rebellion: Literary Experiment in the 1960s and 1970sGerman literature under the conditions of protest and rebellion. Experiments in poetry, prose, and theatre; new directions in art and media theory; historical influences. Taught in English. [3] (HCA)

GER3378 - Dreams in LiteratureThe difference between sleeping and being awake. Literary and philosophical texts. Novels, short stories, diaries, poems, and drama written within the last two hundred years. Prerequisite: 2202. [3] (HCA)

GER3851 - Independent ReadingsDesigned for majors and qualified undergraduates. Projects are carried out under the supervision of a member of the department. All projects must be approved by the department. May be repeated for a total of 6 credits over a four-semester period in 3851 and 3852 combined if there is no duplication in topic, but students may earn only up to 3 credits per semester of enrollment. [1-3; maximum of 6 credits total for four semesters of GER 3851

GER3852 - Independent ReadingsDesigned for majors and qualified undergraduates. Projects are carried out under the supervision of a member of the department. All projects must be approved by the department. May be repeated for a total of 6 credits over a four-semester period in 3851 and 3852 combined if there is no duplication in topic, but students may earn only up to 3 credits per semester of enrollment. [1-3; maximum of 6 credits total for four semesters of GER 3851

GER3890 - Selected TopicsMay be repeated for a total of 12 credits in 3890 and 3891 combined if there is no duplication in topic. Students may enroll in more than one section of this course each semester. [3; maximum of 12 credits total for all semesters of GER 3890 and 3891] (No AXLE credit)

GER3891 - Selected TopicsMay be repeated for a total of 12 credits in 3890 and 3891 combined if there is no duplication in topic. Students may enroll in more than one section of this course per semester. [3; maximum of 12 credits total for all semesters of GER 3890 and 3891] (No AXLE credit)

GER4535 - German RomanticismThe contributions of Schlegel, Tieck, Novalis, Eichendorff, and others to literature, philosophy, and theory.Intellectual, social, and political currents. [3] (INT)

GER4537 - Women and ModernityWomen in German literature from the eighteenth century to the present, focusing on questions of sexuality, political emancipation, artistic identity. No knowledge of German required. [3] (INT)

GER4551 - Topics: Pre-18th Century Culture and Literature (GER)German-speaking cultures and their literatures from 8th to the early 18th century. May be repeated for credit if there is no duplication in topic. Prerequisite: 3201 and 3202W. [3] (INT)

GER4552 - Topics: 18th and 19th C Culture and Literature (GER)Literature, philosophy, art, and politics, 1750-1914, of German-speaking cultures. May be repeated for credit if there is no duplication in topic. Prerequisite: 3201 and 3202W. [3] (INT)

GER4553 - Topics: 20th and 21st Century Culture and Literature (GER)Literature, history, aesthetics, and politics in German-speaking cultures from Dada to the present. May be repeated for credit if there is no duplication in topic. Prerequisite: 3201 and 3202W. [3] (INT)

GER4554 - Topics in Visual Culture and Media (GER)Cinema, media arts, visual culture, and media history of German-speaking cultures from pre-digital to the digital age. May be repeated for credit if there is no duplication in topic. Prerequisite: 3201 and 3202W. [3] (HCA) GER4555 - Topics in German Studies (GER)

Cinema, media arts, visual culture, and media history of German-speaking cultures from pre-digital to the digital age. May be repeated for credit if there is no duplication in topic. Prerequisite: 3201 and 3202W. [3] (HCA) GER4555 - Topics in German Studies (GER)Seminal aspects of German literature, culture, and civilization through interdisciplinary focus. May be repeated for credit if there is no duplication in topic. Prerequisite: 3201 and 3202W. [3] (INT)

GER4556 - Topics in Intellectual History (GER)Major trends and figures from the Enlightenment to the contemporary age. May be repeated for credit if there is no duplication in topic. Prerequisite: 3201 and 3202W. [3] (HCA)

GER4557 - Topics in Genre (GER)Main genres of German literature and culture. Relationship between genres and the social, political, and cultural developments that lead to their formation and transformation. May be repeated for credit if there is no duplication in topic. Prerequisite: 3201 and 3202W. [3] (HCA)

GER4563 - The Age of Goethe-Weimar 1775 to 1805Rational pragmatism, aesthetic innovation in response to Kant and French Revolution. Readings drawn from Goethe's Iphigenia, Hermann und Dorothea, Schiller's Maria Stuart and Wallenstein, and Wieland's Oberon. [3]

GER4564 - Pleasures and Perils in Nineteenth-Century TheatreThe German drama and dramatic theory from Romanticism up to Naturalism with emphasis on selected works by Kleist, B√ºchner, Grillparer, and Hebbel. [3] (INT)

GER4565 - Revolutionizing Twentieth-Century TheatreGerman drama and dramatic theory from Naturalism to the present. Emphasis on Brecht and post-Brechtian drama. [3] (INT)

GER4566 - Nineteenth-Century ProseA study of representative works of the main literary trends from Romanticism to Naturalism. [3] (INT) GER4567 - The German Novel from Kafka to Grass

A study of representative works of the main literary trends from Romanticism to Naturalism. [3] (INT) GER4567 - The German Novel from Kafka to GrassGER4569 - Writing under CensorshipCourse DescriptionAn introduction to the main literary trends and authors of the former East Germany (1949-1989). [3] (HCA) GER4574 - Who Am I? German Autobiographies

GER4569 - Writing under CensorshipAn introduction to the main literary trends and authors of the former East Germany (1949-1989). [3] (HCA) GER4574 - Who Am I? German Autobiographies

An introduction to the main literary trends and authors of the former East Germany (1949-1989). [3] (HCA) GER4574 - Who Am I? German AutobiographiesCanonical and non-canonical texts from the nineteenth and twentieth centuries constructing cultural, religious, and gender identities. Taught in English. [3] (HCA)

GER4576 - Tales of Travel in Modern German CultureGerman curiosity about other cultures from the late eighteenth century to the present. The role of travel in German culture. The ways in which German poets, artists, and filmmakers have embraced different social and natural settings as sites of inspiration, self-discovery, and transformation. All readings and discussion in German. Prerequisite: 2310W. [3] (INT)

GRK1101 - Beginning Greek IClassical Greek. Reading of simplified texts from authors of the fifth and fourth centuries BCE. No credit for students who have earned credit for a more advanced Greek language course. Graded basis only. [3] (No AXLE

GRK1102 - Beginning Greek IIReadings from classical authors. Introduction to Homeric and Hellenistic Greek. No credit for students who have earned credit for a more advanced Greek language course. Graded basis only. Prerequisite: 1101. [3] (INT) GRK1103 - Intensive Elementary Greek

Readings from classical authors. Introduction to Homeric and Hellenistic Greek. No credit for students who have earned credit for a more advanced Greek language course. Graded basis only. Prerequisite: 1101. [3] (INT) GRK1103 - Intensive Elementary GreekThe equivalent of Greek 1101 and 1102. The elements of the Greek language at an accelerated pace. No credit for students who have earned credit for 1101, 1102, or a more advanced Greek language course. [5] (INT) GRK2201 - Intermediate Greek I: Classical and Koin√© Greek

The equivalent of Greek 1101 and 1102. The elements of the Greek language at an accelerated pace. No credit for students who have earned credit for 1101, 1102, or a more advanced Greek language course. [5] (INT) GRK2201 - Intermediate Greek I: Classical and Koin√© GreekReview of Greek grammar, and reading from classical and biblical texts. Prerequisite: 1102. No credit for students who have earned credit for a more advanced Greek language course. [3] (INT)

GRK2202 - Intermediate Greek II: Homer's IliadSelected reading and interpretation; history and literary characteristics of the Homeric epic; practice in reading of meter. Prerequisite: 2201. No credit for students who have earned credit for a more advanced Greek language course. [3] (INT)

GRK3010 - The Greek OratorsClassical Athenian orators, with a focus on Lysias and Demosthenes. Historical context, rhetorical technique, and prose style. Prerequisite: 2202. [3] (HCA)

GRK3020 - The Greek HistoriansSelections from the major Greek historians, especially Herodotus and Thucydides, and study of their philosophy of history; investigation of the development of historical prose writing. Prerequisite: 2201. [3] (HCA) GRK3040 - Readings in Plato and Aristotle

Selections from the major Greek historians, especially Herodotus and Thucydides, and study of their philosophy of history; investigation of the development of historical prose writing. Prerequisite: 2201. [3] (HCA) GRK3040 - Readings in Plato and AristotleSelected readings from the dialogues of Plato and from the ethical writings of Aristotle. Corollary readings and discussions of the pre-Socratic philosophers and the post-Aristotelian schools. Prerequisite: 2202. [3] (HCA) GRK3100 - The Greek Tragedians

Selected readings from the dialogues of Plato and from the ethical writings of Aristotle. Corollary readings and discussions of the pre-Socratic philosophers and the post-Aristotelian schools. Prerequisite: 2202. [3] (HCA) GRK3100 - The Greek TragediansSelections from the plays of Aeschylus, Sophocles, and Euripides. Survey of the development of tragedy. May be repeated for credit with change of subject matter. Prerequisite: 2202. [3] (HCA)

GRK3110 - Greek Lyric PoetryThe Greek melic, elegiac, and iambic traditions, with an introduction to the Greek dialects and special emphasis on Archilochus, Tyrtaeus, Alcaeus, and Sappho. Prerequisite: 2202. [3] (HCA)

GRK3200 - Early Christian WritersWritings from the New Testament to critical works and letters by the Cappadocian fathers. Historical and intellectual context. Rhetoric and style. The Roman East. Prerequisite: 2201. [3] (HCA)

GRK3850 - Independent StudyDesigned for majors wanting to familiarize themselves with works and authors not covered in the regular curriculum. Prerequisite: 6 hours above 2202. May be repeated for a total of 6 credits if there is no duplication in topic, but students may earn only up to 3 credits per semester of enrollment. [1-3; maximum of 6 credits total for all semesters of GRK 3850] (No AXLE credit)

GRK3890 - Special Topics in Greek LiteratureMay be repeated for credit more than once if there is no duplication in topic. Students may enroll in more than one section of this course each semester. [3] (HCA)

HODC3202 - Community Development TheoryThis is a core course in the Community Leadership and Development (CLD) track of the HOD undergraduate program. It is designed to provide a general introduction to the field of community development (CD) by examining appropriate theoretical perspectives. Ecological theory, critical theory, and theories of democracy will be studied for their application to community development issues. The theoretical perspectives examined in the course will also be linked to the diverse fields which inform community development, such as community psychology, sociology, geography, anthropology, education, and planning. Additionally, the course will provide students a more in-depth understanding of particular community development issues by exploring howalternative theoretical perspectives interpret several important community development phenomena. The course will prepare students to understand the theoretical orientations that underlie the dynamics of community development. [3]

HODC3212 - Community Development Organizations and PoliciesIntroduction to the practice of community development (CD), including analysis of, and experience with, CDissues, organizations, and policies. Prepares students to work with public or community agency staff, administrators, planners, policy-makers, or community organizers and leaders, who require analysis and recommendations on particular community issues. Students may also develop experience as part of a research, intervention, or policy development team. The course also focuses on ways ordinary people can become involved in improving their own neighborhoods, communities, and city. [3]

HODC3222 - Action Research and Program EvaluationThis is a specialty core requirement for the Community Leadership and Development (CLD) track in the Human and Organizational Development program. Course teaches policy-relevant field research methods in the context of action science. Students do an actual research project for a client organization and prepare a report with recommendations for policy and action. Students get experience in the conduct of the research as a team of a fictitious consulting organization. [3]

HODC3232 - Ethics for Human Development Professionals(Also listed as HOD 5100 for professional students) Normative evaluation of ethical issues in serving human need. Conflicting values within moral dilemmas will be examined from a variety of theoretical perspectives and practical criteria. Case studies of moral issues confronting the individual, the family, service organizations, and the general public will be reviewed. [3]

HODC3242 - Environmental Politics and JusticeThroughout history, humans have shaped the environment to provide food, shelter, energy, profit, and social power. As climate change advances, our relationship to nature is more complex than ever before. On the one hand, societies have an unprecedented capacity to reconfigure the environment through processes that range from genetic manipulation to geo-engineering. On the other hand, the unequal distribution of environmental problems across races, classes, genders, and nations is intensifying and demands critical interrogation. From farmer suicides in India to protests over hydraulic fracturing ("fracking") and oil pipelines in North America, social movements are demanding more democratic control over land and natural resources. In this course, we will explore environmental justice in theory and practice. Drawing on geography, anthropology, history, and critical race studies, we will examine the following questions: What is nature? Who defines and controls it? Why do environmental inequalities arise and how are they maintained? How are groups resisting and organizing around environmental and climate justice concerns? [3]

HODC3262 - Social Entrepreneurship: Principles and ApplicationThis course explores the idea and practice of "Social Enterprise", an emerging field where new types of organizational models are leveraging business and markets to address important social issues and unmet needs.The complexity of social issues in the 21st century often necessitates innovative, cross-sector, interdisciplinary solutions and organizational forms. Social Enterprise has emerged as one such model with great promise. This course is designed to provide broad exposure to the activity and key issues in the social enterprise sector, as well as a more specific, hands-on learning through projects, case studies and speakers. [3]

HODC3312 - Procedures in Transition to Adult Life(Also listed as SPEDS 3312) Overview of history, legislation, and practice in the areas of community and employment integration for persons with disabilities. Emphasis on various strategies for promoting a successful transition from school to life. Students are required to develop instructional plans for integration within the community. Students will apply their skills in community or classroom settings. [3]

HODC3313 - Practicum: Transition to Adult LifeField-based application of correlated course content to instructional strategies. Assessing, planning, implementing, and evaluating instructional procedures for community and employment integration. Corequisite: HODC 3312. [1]

HODC3322 - Religious and Spiritual OrganizationsThe class focuses on traditional and less studied religious and spiritual organizations and compares and contrasts their features, goals, structures, leaders, and personnel with secular organizations such as businesses.Information is also provided about how religious and/or spiritual features are being incorporated in a variety of organizational settings. [3]

HODC3332 - High Poverty Youth: Improving Outcomes(Also listed as SPED 3332) Youth from high poverty backgrounds may be at risk for outcomes that include academic failure, school dropout, drug abuse, unemployment, or incarceration. Students will be working with schools and community agencies in Nashville to improve outcomes for youth living in high povertyneighborhoods. There will be class meetings as well as ongoing service-learning field experiences. Fieldwork will include mentoring, tutoring, or providing job readiness training to youth in neighborhood community centers or students' high schools. [3]

HODC3342 - Introduction to Community PsychologyTheory, research, and action in community psychology. History of mental health care; ecological theories of community, stress, coping, and social support; deviance labeling; community assessment strategies;prevention, empowerment, and community and organizational change programs; societal-level intervention policies. [3]

HODC3352 - Philanthropy and Social Problem SolvingTopic: Philanthropy & Social Problem Solving. This course provides an opportunity to engage in the practice of philanthropy, while learning about charitable giving/fundraising, social problem-solving, and the non-profit sector. The semester will be divided into four sections: I. Problem identification; II. Approaches to change; III.Evaluating organizational effectiveness/impact and fit with theories of change; and IV. Decision making.Prerequisites: students must have taken courses in group processes (HOD 1300 or equivalent), organizations (HOD 2100 or equivalent), and systematic inquiry/research methods (HOD 2500 or equivalent), so that they are prepared to work in teams and to analyze both social problems and the organizations that aim to deal with them. [3]

HODC3650 - Community Leadership and Development SeminarExploration of selected topics related to the community leadership and development track of the Human and Organizational Development Program. May be repeated for credit with change of topic. [3]

HODC3850 - Independent Study in Community Leadership and DevelopmentIndividual programs of reading or the conduct of research studies in community leadership and development.Consent of supervising faculty member required. May be repeated. [1-3]

HODC3870 - Practicum in Community Leadership and DevelopmentAn intensive practicum experience. Three contact hours per week required for each credit hour. [1-3]

HODC3890 - Special Topics in Community Leadership and DevelopmentExploration of special issues on topics related to community leadership and development. May be repeated for credit with change of topic. [1-3]

HODE3205 - Education Policy Analysis MethodsHow should the government choose among options to address the country's education problems? The main goal of this course is to introduce students to the concepts, methods, and tools useful in performing policy analysis in general, and to give students practice applying the policy analysis methods to real-world educational policy issues including school vouchers, using measures of teacher value-added, financing higher education, and the importance of resources for schooling and student achievement. Prerequisite: HOD 2700 or PSCI 1100. [3]

HODE3215 - Education and Public PolicyThe course explores contemporary social, philosophical, and political dimensions of education policy, including issues related to civic engagement, equity and school organization, and the ecology of schooling. Course readings and discussions will involve fundamental questions about the relationship between schools and society: What is the purpose of American public education? How do policy values, including equity and excellence, social justice and accountability, shape education policy? How is education policy related to social and economic outcomes and opportunities? Prerequisite: HOD 2700 or PSCI 1100. [3]

HODE3225 - Introduction to Public Finance of EducationIn this course, we first provide a foundation of knowledge for the economics of the public sector. In this part of the course, we will discuss the appropriate role of government activity in a market economy as well as other behavioral consequences of government policy from the perspective of the consumers, the policymakers, regulators, and general taxpayers. After establishing a better understanding of the economics of the public sector, we will examine economic models to explain real world government policymaking with a specific focus on education policy, including the rationale and mechanisms of funding education as well other important policy issues such as the provision of early childhood education, teacher labor markets, and accountability and school choice programs. [3]

HODE3315 - State and Local GovernmentExamines the operation of state and local governments within the American federal system. Students will have met expectations for the course when they are able to express well their understanding of how American state and local governments serve the interests of their residents within a system that is highly charged politically.Prerequisite: HOD 2700 or PSCI 1100. [3]

HODE3650 - Seminars in Education PolicyExploration of special issues related to the education policy track of the Human and Organizational Development Program. May be repeated for credit with change of topic. [3]

HODE3850 - Independent Study in Education PolicyIndividual Programs of reading or the conduct of research studies in education policy. Consent of supervising faculty member required. May be repeated. [1-3]

HODE3870 - Practicum in Education PolicyAn intensive practicum experience. Three contact hours per week required for each credit hour. [1-3]

HODE3890 - Special Topics in Education PolicyExploration of selected topics related to education policy. May be repeated for credit with change of topic. [1-3]

HODH3201 - Introduction to Human ServicesThis course is a comprehensive and realistic survey of the diverse and dynamic field of human services.Students will examine: 1) significant historical developments; 2) populations served; 3) social welfare/poverty theories; 4) career opportunities; and 5) controversial and ethical issues. The course will emphasize special tasks and activities that are performed by the contemporary human service worker. [3]

HODH3211 - Introduction to CounselingAn overview of the counseling profession: theories, techniques, settings, and specialty areas. In addition to lectures and class discussions, the course includes an experiential component designed to increase students'listening and responding skills. By the end of the course, students will have a clear understanding of what being a counselor entails. [3]

HODH3221 - Health Service Delivery to Diverse PopulationsThis course focuses on the study of value systems of diverse groups, as well as variables related to gender, age, lifestyle, religion, social class, race, geography, and developmental state, and how these relate to health status and health service needs. This course provides students with a basic knowledge and understanding of diversity so that they may be more effective in serving the needs of all people. Transportation class fee: $50.00 [3]

HODH3231 - Introduction to Health ServicesThis course will focus on the evolution of the U.S. health care system, as well as on the evolution of health care systems in diverse environments from around the globe. The content of the course focuses on the nature and dynamics of the macro health system environments and the design and function of organizational models in those environments. Particular attention will be paid to contemporary health service organizational models, such as managed care, integrated delivery systems, and physician-hospital organizations. Topics include education and training of health care professionals, the role of health care providers, public, private, and voluntary agencies, and the interests of major stake holders. [3]

HODH3241 - Health PolicyThis course presents broad perspectives for understanding health policy within historical, political, and economic contexts. Lectures and assignments will primarily focus on health policy in the United States with a particular emphasis on the Tennessee State Legislature and Metropolitan Davidson County. Opportunities are available for application to national and international issues. Learners will be provided with a foundation from which to base their work, including an overview of the U. S. health care system and public health infrastructure, as well as a framework for conducting policy analyses. [3]

HODH3311 - Introduction to Health PromotionThis course is designed to enhance the student's understanding of health promotion concepts that relate directly to improved lifestyle behavior change and disease risk reduction. In addition, health promotion program development, program management, and program initiatives in a variety of settings will be addressed. [3]

HODH3321 - Introduction to Sports MedicineCurrent topics in sports medicine, with an emphasis on prevention, management, and rehabilitation, and administrative aspects of sports medicine. [3] (Not currently offered)

HODH3331 - Managing Health Care OrganizationsThis is an applied course which combines theoretical knowledge with professional learning experiences, such as case studies, guest lectures, films, management development exercises, and group projects. This course provides a conceptual review of basic managerial functions such as 1) planning, 2) organizing, 3) controlling, 4) staffing, and 5) influencing. The course addresses related managerial activities such as communication, decision making, and legal and legislative issues. Prerequisite: HODH 3201 or HODH 3231. [3]

HODH3650 - Health and Human Services SeminarExploration of special issues related to the health and human services track of the Human and Organizational Development Program. May be repeated for credit with change of topic. [3]

HODH3850 - Independent Study in Health and Human ServicesIndividual programs of reading or the conduct of research studies in Health and Human Services. Consent of supervising faculty member required. May be repeated. [1-3]

HODH3870 - Practicum in Health and Human ServicesAn intensive practicum experience. Three contact hours per week required for each credit hour. [1-3]

HODH3890 - Special Topics in Health and Human ServicesExploration of selected topics related to health and human services. May be repeated for credit with change of topic. [1-3]

HODI3200 - Global Dimensions of Community DevelopmentThe globalization process induces new forms of human organization and transforms existing organizations at the community, national, and international levels. This course provides an understanding of the nature, functioning, and development of organizations affected by globalization in societies different from our own and as they relate to multilateral or global institutions that span different social and cultural settings. To do this, the course explores organizations from a comparative perspective, using the analytical framework of human ecology, in terms of differential access to economic and other productive assets, education and information, security and the rule of law, social capital and cultural identity. [3]

HODI3210 - Leadership and Change in International OrganizationsThis course uses an interdisciplinary case study approach to investigate organizational challenges associated with today's international environment. Students examine the impact of culture, politics, and policy, and other international phenomena such as exchange rates, trade, and capital markets on organizational leadership, structure, and performance. Students also explore various dilemmas that confront decision-makers ininternational organizations as they attempt to reconcile institutional objectives, individual preferences, and varying cultural norms.[3]

HODI3220 - International Organizations and Economic DevelopmentThe number of international organizations has proliferated since World War II, and their functions have diversified. Some are altruistic. Others are regulatory. Some serve as forums for debate, others as instruments for military action or enforcement of international agreements in such diverse fields as health, labor, agriculture, human rights, environment, culture, and trade. This course addresses how these organizations are financed, how they are governed, and how they create and manage political controversy. It covers their legal mandates and structure, seeks to develop awareness of issues of human capital and the World Bank, addresses the controversies and debates over globalization and the role of international organizations in the international regulatory environment, and assesses the future of such organizations in an increasingly interdependent world.[3]

HODI3230 - Education and Economic DevelopmentThis course reviews the history and application of human capital theory. It provides students with examples of applications in economic development policy. It gives students practice in applying common statistical models.It exposes students to current debates in education policy in the World Bank and other international organizations which result from those models. [3]

HODI3240 - Effectiveness in International For-Profit OrganizationsIntercultural understandings and skills are key in today's job market, due to fast-growing opportunities and challenges in international, multinational and global businesses. In this course students will, through a variety of methodologies, explore the current trends of exploding world trade, emerging nations, competition for talent and resources, and the impact of technology and changing demographics. Additionally, students will develop skills and understandings in working with cultures, managing cross-cultural teams, and the ins and outs of working abroad. [3]

HODI3250 - Building Knowledge Economics in AsiaThis course focuses on the challenges and opportunities faced by the Asia-Pacific Region in making the transition to knowledge-based economies. Topics cover global, regional, and country-specific policies and initiatives aimed at building the four pillars of the Knowledge Economy (as defined by the World Bank): economic incentive and institutional regime, education, innovation, and information and communications technologies. This course is intended for advanced undergraduate students interested in gaining a deeper understanding of the transformational changes in the vast and diverse region. [3]

HODI3260 - Education in the Asia-Pacific Region: Development, Reform, and InnovationThis course focuses on an in-depth analysis of current developments in education and schooling in the vast and diverse Asia-Pacific Region. Students will examine perspectives from educational researchers, policy makers and practitioners on the major issues, concerns and prospects regarding educational developments in the region. [3]

HODI3270 - Global Sustainable DevelopmentThis interdisciplinary course will help students to develop a capacity to analyze society-environment relations across spacial scales (from local to the global) using approaches from multiple academic disciplines and professional fields. The course's dual focus on analytical approaches and environmental objects (rather than a typical emphasis on problems) underscores the fact that today's concerned citizens and professionals must be able to analyze complex society-environmental relations from multiple perspectives and at multiple scales.Sustainability demands insights and methods from education, the social sciences, business and organizational studies, the natural sciences, and more. [3]

HODI3650 - International Leadership and Development SeminarExploration of special issues related to the international leadership and development track of the Human and Organizational Development Program. May be repeated for credit with change of topic. [3]

HODI3850 - Independent Study in International Leadership and DevelopmentIndividual programs of reading or the conduct of research in international leadership and development. Consent of supervising faculty member required. May be repeated. [1-3]

HODI3870 - Practicum in International Leadership and DevelopmentAn intensive practicum experience. Three contact hours per week required for each credit hour. [1-3]

HODI3875 - Field School in Intercultural EducationThis course takes place in various sites over a 10-week period in the summer session. It provides training in community field research and analysis techniques directed to human, social, and civic development issues. [3]

HODI3890 - Special Topics in International Leadership and DevelopmentExploration of special topics related to international leadership and development. May be repeated for credit with change of topic. [1-3]

HODL3204 - Leadership Theory and PracticeA systematic study of the formal theories and models of the leadership process and the research supporting and challenging them. Students will complete a wide range of leadership self-assessments; design a leadership self-development plan; and participate in individual and group problem solving, decision making, conflict resolution, and performance appraisal simulations and case studies focusing on personal and organizational effectiveness.Prerequisite: HOD 2100. [3]

HODL3224 - Analyzing Organizational EffectivenessEffective leaders are able to analyze internal results and external trends in order to make effective decisions.Students will gain first-hand knowledge of the financial and strategic issues critical to effective decision-making through a mix of lectures, case studies and one problem-based learning module. The primary focus will be on the relevant critical thinking skills such as: identifying relevant decision criteria, interpreting trends in the underlying data (both financial and operational), and communicating that analysis to executives in a manner that can be readily digested. [3]

HODL3234 - Advanced Organizational TheoryA comprehensive study of current theories and applied research in organizational effectiveness. Emphasis is on the principles and practices of organizational restructuring, organizational development and planned changes, systems and processes, self-managed teams, and Total Quality. Experiential learning through simulations and field work will reinforce systematic inquiry, strategic planning, and applied organizational assessment skills.Prerequisite: HOD 2100. [3]

HODL3244 - Introduction to Human Resource DevelopmentAn introduction to the theory and practice of human resource development (design and implementation of training in corporate or human service organizations). Special emphasis on roles played by HRD professionals and concepts and skills needed for entry into the profession. [3]

HODL3254 - Human Resource ManagementA comprehensive survey of human resource management theory, procedures, and practices, with emphasis on the organizational leader's role and responsibilities for recruiting and selection, placement and career development, employee relations, labor relations, performance appraisal, compensation and benefits,workplace ethics, equal employment opportunity, safety and health, legislation and workplace regulations, development of personnel policies and practices, and the techniques of strategic human resource planning. [3]

HODL3264 - Evidence-based Practice in OrganizationsAccessing and using published research in solving organizational and social problems is a cornerstone of movements in management, education, medicine and a range of other fields. Using evidence from academic research has even become part of the definition of ethical practice in many of these fields. As a result, identifying and appraising research studies that might be used to solve individual, team and organizational problems has become a critical skill for practitioners. From this research, practitioners must be prepared to create actionable interventions and to persuade others to adopt them. Prerequisites: HOD 2100 (concurrent enrollment allowed) [3]

HODL3274 - Managing Organizational ChangeThis course focuses on organizational development philosophy and practices of planned change, and the theory and techniques of organizational consulting. Students will participate in simulations and actual organizational development interventions. Prerequisite: HODL 3204 or HODL 3234. [3]

HODL3284 - Gender and LeadershipWhat does the research on leadership tell us? Broad based leadership research has examined leadership by gender (Eagly & Carli, 2007; Gage, Mumma, & Fritz, 2004), feminine and masculine characteristics of leadership (Eagly & Carli, 2007; Pittinsky, Bacon, & Welle, 2007; Valian, 1998), and perceptions of women’s ability to lead (Rhode & Kellerman, 2007). Yet much leadership research has typically addressed leadership development from a traditional view: white, male, positional leadership. How can we bring about a shift in the view of leaders and leadership? What role does and can gender identity play in effective approaches to leadership? In what ways can we learn to problematize situations and develop solutions through more contemporary leadershipapproaches? Utilizing research, popular readings, and voices from leaders from various gender identities, this course will examine the theoretical perspectives of leadership and gender. Exploration of one’s view of self-as-leader including gender identity, will also be incorporated. Students will come to understand what we know about gender and leadership through the examination and critique of the scholarship, and learn how to use their own voice to be an advocate for self and others. [3]

HODL3314 - Strategic Planning and Project ManagementThis advanced seminar and workshop-based course focuses on the key organizational processes of strategic planning and project management. Building on prior instruction in leadership and organizational theory and practices, students will complete a critical analysis of strategic leadership theory and models of organizational planning. Activities include evaluation of internal and external factors impacting on planning; participation in strategic planning and project management simulations; evaluation of the performance of selected strategic leaders as planners; and practice with key planning tools and technologies. [3]

HODL3324 - Executive LeadershipThis course introduces students to concepts of leadership involved in various social, political, and corporate domains. Course content relies on biographies of renowned leaders to illustrate principles of executive leadership. [3]

HODL3334 - Challenges of LeadershipThis course is designed as an extension of the study of leadership theory and practices begun in HODL 3204.Provides opportunities to investigate leadership concepts introduced in HODL 3204 in more depth. Prerequisite: HODL 3204. [3]

HODL3650 - Leadership and Organizational Effectiveness SeminarExploration of selected topics related to the leadership and organizational effectiveness track of the Human and Organizational Development Program. May be repeated for credit with change of topic. [3]

HODL3850 - Independent Study in Leadership and Organizational EffectivenessIndividual Programs of readings or the conduct of research studies in leadership and organizationaleffectiveness. Consent of supervising faculty member required. May be repeated. [1-3]

HODL3870 - Practicum in Leadership and Organizational EffectivenessAn intensive practicum experience. Three contact hours per week required for each credit hour. [1-3]

HODL3890 - Special Topics in Leadership and Organizational EffectivenessExploration of selected topics related to the leadership and organizational effectiveness track of the Human and Organizational Development Program. May be repeated for credit with change of topic. [3]

CREO1101 - Elementary Creole I (Duke)Haitian Creole or Krey√≤l language. Vocabulary and idioms. Haitian culture. Understanding, speaking, reading, and writing in contexts of health care, Haitian women's rights, and unpaid child servants (restav√®k). Offered on a graded basis only. [3] (No AXLE credit)

CREO1102 - Elementary Creole II (Duke)Essential elements of Creole language and aspects of Haitian culture. Speaking, listening, reading, and writing.Exposure to Haitian culture through films, storytelling, games, music, and proverbs. Prerequisite: 1101 or a comparable level of previous Creole language experience, such as familial background in Creole. Offered on a graded basis only. [3] (INT)

CREO2201 - Intermediate Creole I (Duke)Understanding, speaking, reading, and writing in cultural context; issues of rural life in Haiti, religion, Frenchified Creole vs popular Creole. Texts, poems, novel excerpts. Focus on contemporary events and debates in Haitian culture. Offered on a graded basis only. Prerequisite: 1102. [3] (INT)

CREO2202 - Intermediate Creole II (Duke)Second semester of Intermediate Creole. Offered on a graded basis only. Prerequisite: 2201 or equivalent. [3]

CREO3301 - Advanced Haitian-Creole I (Duke)Listening, speaking, reading, and writing skills. Themes related to Ayiti such as literature(s), language(s), education, history, and different types of Haitian music. Pioneers of Haitian Krey√≤l literature and works of Haitian scholars/authors published in the past ten years. Music groups that left their mark on Haitian music. [3]

CREO3302 - Advanced Haitian-Creole II (Duke)TBDHebrewHEBR1101 - Elementary HebrewCourse DescriptionIntroduction to alphabet, the basics of grammar, and elementary conversation. Classes meet three times per week with an additional two hours a week required in the language laboratory. No credit for students who have earned credit for a more advanced Hebrew language course. [4] (No AXLE credit)

HEBR1101 - Elementary HebrewIntroduction to alphabet, the basics of grammar, and elementary conversation. Classes meet three times per week with an additional two hours a week required in the language laboratory. No credit for students who have earned credit for a more advanced Hebrew language course. [4] (No AXLE credit)

HEBR1102 - Elementary HebrewContinuation of 1101. Greater stress upon conversation and grammar. Classes meet three times a week with an additional two hours a week required in the language laboratory. No credit for students who have earned credit for a more advanced Hebrew language course. Prerequisite: 1101. [4] (INT)

HEBR2201 - Intermediate HebrewIntroduction to modern Hebrew reading, conversation, advanced grammar, and conversation. Classes meet three times a week with an additional three hours a week spent in independent work in the language laboratory.No credit for students who have earned credit for a more advanced Hebrew language course. Prerequisite: 1102. [3] (INT)

HEBR2202 - Intermediate HebrewContinuation of 2201. Greater emphasis on reading and writing. Classes meet three times a week with an additional three hours a week spent in independent work in the language laboratory. No credit for students who have earned credit for a more advanced Hebrew language course. Prerequisite: 2201. [3] (INT)

HEBR2301 - Advanced Hebrew GrammarEmphasis on syntax and grammar supplemented by listening, speaking, and reading. No credit for students who have earned credit for a more advanced Hebrew language course. Prerequisite: 2202. [3] (INT)

HEBR2302W - Advanced Hebrew CompositionDevelopment of writing skills through the study of short stories, poems, articles, television, and web materials.Prerequisite: 2301. [3] (INT)

HEBR3851 - Independent Study in Modern HebrewMay be repeated for a total of 6 credits in 3851 and 3852 combined if there is no duplication in topic, but students may earn only up to 3 credits per semester of enrollment. [1-3; maximum of 6 credits total in HEBR

HEBR3852 - Independent Study in Modern HebrewMay be repeated for a total of 6 credits in 3851 and 3852 combined if there is no duplication in topic, but students may earn only up to 3 credits per semester of enrollment. [1-3; maximum of 6 credits total in HEBR

HNUR1101 - Elementary Hindi-Urdu ISpeaking-listening skills and basic grammar. Introduction to reading and writing in Devanagari (Hindi) and Nastaliq (Urdu) scripts and to South Asian cultural materials. No credit for students who have earned credit for a more advanced Hindi-Urdu language course. [5] (No AXLE credit)

HNUR1102 - Elementary Hindi-Urdu IIReading, writing, speaking, and listening. Cultural contexts of speaking Hindi-Urdu. No credit for students who have earned credit for a more advanced Hindi-Urdu language course. Prerequisite: 1101. [5] (INT)

HNUR2201 - Intermediate Hindi-Urdu IConversational skills, writing, vocabulary, and grammar. Reading texts in Devanagari (Hindi) and Nastaliq (Urdu) scripts. Discussion of cultural materials in Hindi-Urdu. No credit for students who have earned credit for a more advanced Hindi-Urdu language course. Prerequisite: 1102. [5] (INT)

HNUR2202 - Intermediate Hindi-Urdu IIReading, writing, speaking, and listening with authentic materials. Common and specialized vocabulary. Cultural contexts of spoken Hindi-Urdu. No credit for students who have earned credit for a more advanced Hindi-Urdu language course. Prerequisite: 2201. [5] (INT)

HNUR3301 - Advanced Hindi-Urdu IReading, writing, speaking, and listening with authentic materials. Advanced vocabulary, literary, and cultural studies. No credit for students who have earned credit for a more advanced Hindi-Urdu language course.Prerequisite: 2202. [3] (INT)

HNUR3302 - Advanced Hindi-Urdu IIReading, writing, speaking, and listening with authentic materials. Advanced vocabulary, literary, and cultural studies. No credit for students who have earned credit for a more advanced Hindi-Urdu language course.Prerequisite: 3301. [3] (INT)

HNUR3321 - Readings in Hindi-Urdu LiteratureAdvanced readings, topics vary by semester. May be repeated for credit. Prerequisite: HNUR 3301 or instructor permission. [3] (HCA)

HIST1001 - Commons iSeminarTopics vary. General Elective credit only. [1] (No AXLE credit)

HIST1038 - Language(s) in the WorldOrigins and varieties of language communication, its classification and study. Languages of empires. Bible as historical vehicle for language development and writing. Intersections of language and religion. Dialect and translation; communication alternatives including non-spoken, artificial, and non-human languages. Rap.Taboos. Language death. [3] (INT)

HIST1039 - Global History 1453 to PresentGlobal interaction and the international order. Methodological approaches. Patterns in global flows of people, capital, goods, and ideas. History of human contact, productive capabilities, wealth, and inequalities. Regimes of human differentiation and power, war and peace. [3] (INT)

HIST1040W - Revolutions in the Modern WorldAge of Democratic Revolution to the Arab Spring. U.S., French, Haitian, Russian, Iranian Revolutions. Overthrow of traditional regimes; invention of revolutionary states. Democracy, rights, Marxism. Nature of legal, social, and economic change. Radicalization and violence. Global influence and legacy. Offered on a graded basis only. [3]

HIST1050 - East Asia since 1800Traditional orders in China, Japan, Korea, and Vietnam. Encroachment of European empires. Nineteenth- and twentieth-century social and political revolutions. Japanese imperialism and the invention of pan-Asianism. WWII in the Pacific; the rise and persistence of Communism. East Asia as a new center of the global economy in the twenty-first century. [3] (INT)

HIST1060 - Premodern ChinaThe development of Chinese civilization from ancient times to the seventeenth century. The birth and development of the Chinese identity; Confucianism, Taoism and Buddhism; the moral, military, and bureaucratic foundations of the imperial institution; the Silk Road; eunuchs and concubines; the commercial revolution. [3]

HIST1061W - Law and Society in Imperial China, 1600-1900Evolution of governance and law in imperial China; early modern legal culture. Law concerning crimes, property, commerce, gender and sexuality. Qing-dynasty law codes and judicial records. [3] (INT)

HIST1070 - China from Empire to the People's RepublicFrom the seventeenth century to the present. The establishment and expansion of the Qing empire and its clashes with European empires. Twentieth-century revolutions and war with Japan. Mao and the making of the Communist state; post-Mao economic and social reforms. Tibet and ethnic minority issues. [3] (INT)

HIST1111 - First-Year Writing SeminarIndependent learning and inquiry in an environment in which students can express knowledge and defend opinions through intensive class discussion, oral presentations, and written expression. May be repeated for credit once if there is no duplication of topic, but students may earn only up to 3 credits in any 1111 course per semester of enrollment. [3; maximum of 6 credits total for all semesters of 1111] (AXLE credit category varies by section)

HIST1160 - Modern South AsiaEarly modern South Asia to British imperialism and the independence of India and Pakistan. Colonial society, political movements, caste, gender, and religious "reform." Mass nationalism and Gandhi, religious conflict, and the partition of India and Pakistan. Debates on history and memory. [3] (INT)

HIST1161 - India Before Europe: 3000 B.C.E.-1750 C.ESouth Asia from Indus Valley civilization to British imperialism. Era of Vedas, epics, Mauryas, and Guptas. Rise of Buddhism and Jainism. Overseas expansion and trade with Southeast Asia. Early encounters with Islam, followed by Turkic and Mughal rule over north India. Portuguese, Dutch, and British trading ventures in India. End of Mughal rule and beginning of British empire. [3] (INT)

HIST1162 - The East India Company, 1600-1858: The Company That Ruled The WorldFormation of an English joint-stock company to trade in Asia. Establishment of trading posts (factories). Conflicts with Mughals, Portuguese, Dutch, and pirates. Shift from trade to politics; Company government in South Asia.Resource extraction and colonialism. Rebellion of 1857 and abolition of the Company. Forerunner of modern corporations. Offered on a graded basis only. [3] (INT)

HIST1190 - A History of IslamOrigins to the present, with emphasis on the modern era. Early and medieval Islam, modernism andfundamentalism. Arabia and the Wahhabis, Iran and Shi'ism, South Asian syncretism, Muslim minorities in Western Europe and the United States. Recent Islamic views on human rights, science, economics, and other religions. [3] (INT)

HIST1200 - The Arab SpringRoots of the movement and the course of events. The role played by the West and by print and other media.Ideologies throughout the Islamic world. Prospects for the future. [3] (INT)

HIST1269 - Introduction to African StudiesInterdisciplinary exploration of the African experience. Human origins, geography, race and ethnicity, and historical and contemporary issues. Shifting theoretical constructions of Africa alongside the social, cultural, political, and economic forces at play across the continent. [3] (INT)

HIST1270 - Early African HistoryEarly history of African civilization and cultural practices; rise of major empires; ecology and religion; Indian and Atlantic Ocean trade economies; the slave trade. Not open to students who have completed 1270W. [3] (INT) HIST1270W - Early African History

Early history of African civilization and cultural practices; rise of major empires; ecology and religion; Indian and Atlantic Ocean trade economies; the slave trade. Not open to students who have completed 1270W. [3] (INT) HIST1270W - Early African HistoryEarly history of African civilization and cultural practices; rise of major empires; ecology and religion; Indian and Atlantic Ocean trade economies; the slave trade. Serves as repeat credit for students who have completed HIST1270. [3] (INT)

HIST1271W - War, Refugees, and Reconciliatory Justice in AfricaHistorical and contemporary conflicts. Border wars, civil wars, genocides, terrorism, political violence, and warlordism in Africa. Displacement and refugees; truth and reconciliation commissions; post-conflict justice; peace processes, post-conflict reconstruction. [3] (INT)

HIST1280 - Africa since 1800: The Revolutionary YearsPolitical, economic, and social patterns in SubSaharan Africa from 1800 to the present. The transition from traditional states and societies, through the colonial interlude and the quest for independence to the modern national setting with its problems of development. Emphasis on the peoples of Nigeria and South Africa. [3]

HIST1281W - The Making of African Cities: Histories of Globalization and MigrationCultural, political, and environmental history of towns from antiquity to the present. Emergence of early city-states. Relationship between urban formations and natural environments. Trade, migration, and religious networks. Colonial rule and urban planning. Nationalist movements. Expressive cultures. Challenges of urbanization. Development, infrastructure, and technology. [3] (INT)

HIST1320 - The Senses of Happiness: A HistoryAspects of the experience of happiness through a history of the senses and emotions. Laughter, ecstasy, tasting and smelling, seeing and hearing, prosperity, great outdoors, home and hearth, intimacy, creature companions, and health. [3] (P)

HIST1345 - The World of RomeOrigin of the city to the collapse of the Western empire, particularly from Punic Wars to the Severan emperors.Political, military, social, and religious history. Ancient authors and material culture. Not open to students who have earned credit for CLAS 2150 and 2160 without permission. Total credit for this course, CLAS 2150, and 2160 will not exceed 6 hours. Credit hours reduced from third course taken (or from test or transfer credit) as appropriate. [3] (INT)

HIST1350 - Western Civilization to 1700Judeo-Christian and Greco-Roman foundations to the beginning of the eighteenth century. [3] (INT)

HIST1352 - Law, Trade, and War in European Empires, 1400-1900Major economic and legal transformations of the early modern world. Strategies of Portuguese, Spanish, Dutch, English, and French overseas empires in Asia, Africa, and the Americas. Role of law, in particular the legal framework for European-indigenous relations and the rise of international law. Imperial economies, especially shifting patterns of trade and labor. Violence against indigenous people and rivalries among imperial powers. [3]

HIST1353 - Atlantic History in the Digital AgeAtlantic World, fifteenth through nineteenth centuries. Emergence and expansion of the slave trade; encounters between peoples of African, American, and European descent; competing legal and economic imperial modes.Traditional readings-based coursework combined with introduction to related digital history projects and methods. [3] (INT)

HIST1355W - Innovation and Renovation in Renaissance EuropeRenaissance as historical period. Reason versus faith. Materiality. Cultural interactions across political and economic borders. Works by Dante, Petrarch, and Machiavelli. [3] (HCA)

HIST1360 - Modern Europe, 1650 to 1990: States, Economies, and KnowledgeModern European history from the Thirty Years War to the end of the Cold War. History of states, economies, and the production of knowledge. [3] (INT)

HIST1368 - Rio de Janeiro: Culture and Citizenship in the Marvelous CityFrom the nineteenth century to the present. Race, class, and gender. Film and literary sources. Modernity and marginalization. [3] (INT)

HIST1370 - Colonial Latin AmericaSurvey of Latin American history from pre-Columbian times to the early nineteenth century. Iberian, Amerindian and African background; the conquest; construction of colonial society and institutions; wars for independence.[3] (INT)

HIST1375 - Latinx Histories of the US SouthLatin American origin communities in the South from the early 1900s to the present. Migration experiences, evolution of US immigration policy, urban and rural economies, work and labor organizing, race and regional politics, and civil rights mobilizations. Mexican farm workers in Louisiana and Arkansas, women cigar laborers in Tampa, and rural Latinx communities in today's many meatpacking towns. Demographic patterns,undocumented life-ways, and collective placemaking endeavors of the last 30 years. [3] (US)

HIST1378 - Social Movements in Latin America, 1780-1912Citizenship and state formation. Race, gender, and nation. Tupac Amaru insurgency, Brazilian abolitionism, and the first Black political party in Cuba. [3] (P)

HIST1379W - The Inquisition in the New World: Law, Deviance, and Heresy in Colonial MexicoInquisition as a window on colonial law and culture in Mexico. Church, state, and empire. Religious change.Gender, race and ethnicity, and religious practices. Understandings of orthodoxy, heresy, deviance, and cultural practices. [3] (P)

HIST1380 - Modern Latin AmericaA survey of Latin American history from the early nineteenth century to the present. Wars for independence; rise of new nations and export-oriented economies; case studies in revolution, nationalism, and reform in the twentieth century; U.S.-Latin American relations. [3] (INT)

HIST1383 - Slave Resistance in the AmericasResistance across North and South America. Slave flight, marronage, and full-blown rebellion. Free black towns in Florida, Mexico, Panama, and Colombia created by former slaves. Problems of evidence and voice through primary sources of free and enslaved Africans and their descendants. Sources by historians and archaeologists.Art and material culture of rebels. Offered on a graded basis only. [3] (INT)

HIST1384 - Law, Gender, and Slave Emancipation in Latin AmericaAfro-Latin America in the long 19th century. How slavery endured and shaped modern statecraft in Latin America. Gendered and racialized labor and social structures after slavery. Gradual-abolition and free-womb laws. [3] (INT)

HIST1385W - Disease and Disorder in the Atlantic WorldSpanish Atlantic from Columbus through the Haitian Revolution. Smallpox, slavery, and rebellion. [3] (INT) HIST1390 - America to 1776: Discovery to Revolution

Spanish Atlantic from Columbus through the Haitian Revolution. Smallpox, slavery, and rebellion. [3] (INT) HIST1390 - America to 1776: Discovery to RevolutionNorth American colonies from the Iberian Atlantic dominion through the zenith of the British Empire. The impact of the European quest for empire on Native American and West African societies. The emergence of colonial North America within the context of European imperial rivalries and Native American political and economic networks. [3] (US)

HIST1395 - The Underground RailroadRunaway slaves and their assistance from free blacks, whites, and other slaves. Impact on the course of slavery.HIST1400 - U.S. 1776-1877: Revolution to Civil War and ReconstructionCourse DescriptionIndependence and establishment of new political institutions. Westward expansion, economic expansion, formation of a distinctive American culture. Development of mass party politics, evangelical Protestantism, and reform movements. Sectional conflict over slavery, Civil War; Reconstruction, and the dawn of the Gilded Age.[3] (US)

HIST1400 - U.S. 1776-1877: Revolution to Civil War and ReconstructionIndependence and establishment of new political institutions. Westward expansion, economic expansion, formation of a distinctive American culture. Development of mass party politics, evangelical Protestantism, and reform movements. Sectional conflict over slavery, Civil War; Reconstruction, and the dawn of the Gilded Age.[3] (US)

HIST1405 - A History of Nashville during the Civil WarCauses of the war; international, political, and economic perspectives. Military history. Strategy and logistics; railroads and rivers. Technological and medical developments. Battle of Franklin. Battle of Nashville. Tennessee and the Western theatre. [3] (US)

HIST1410 - U.S. 1877-1945: Reconstruction through World War IIEconomic, political, and social history during the era of industrialization, mass immigration, the rise of mass culture, the Great Depression, and the two world wars. [3] (US)

HIST1420 - U.S. Post-1945: Cold War to the PresentPolitical, international, social, and cultural currents that have shaped contemporary America. [3] (US) HIST1422W - FDR, the New Deal, & War

Political, international, social, and cultural currents that have shaped contemporary America. [3] (US) HIST1422W - FDR, the New Deal, & War1930s and 1940s United States' domestic and foreign policy during the presidency of Franklin D. Roosevelt. U. S.global ascendancy and rise of the new welfare state. [3] (US)

HIST1425W - Body, Mind, and Soul: Elvis, Dylan, Springsteen and Postwar AmericaRock and roll's transformation of American culture. Focus on three pivotal artists and their role in the history of each of their breakout decades: the 1950s, 1960s, and 1970s. Readings and listenings on the African American roots of rock, the gendered dimensions of the genre, the role of dissent and accommodation in popular music.Issues of youth, alienation, religion, and individuality. [3] (US)

HIST1427 - United States in the 1970sThe 1970s as pivotal to cultural, economic, and social change. Vietnam, Watergate, and economics ofstagflation. Fundamental changes in race and gender relations. Transformations through and in music, film, and television. U.S. national politics, concluding with an analysis of the causes of the "Reagan Revolution." [3] (US) HIST1427W - The United States in the Seventies

stagflation. Fundamental changes in race and gender relations. Transformations through and in music, film, and television. U.S. national politics, concluding with an analysis of the causes of the "Reagan Revolution." [3] (US) HIST1427W - The United States in the SeventiesThe 1970s as pivotal to cultural, economic, and social change. Vietnam, Watergate, and economics ofHIST1430W - North American Indians and the EnvironmentCourse DescriptionNorth American Indians' interaction with their environments over time and space. Challenges posed by colonial practices and government policies. American Indian communities' projects in U.S. and Canada to sustain spiritual and material connection to natural world. [3] (US)

HIST1430W - North American Indians and the EnvironmentNorth American Indians' interaction with their environments over time and space. Challenges posed by colonial practices and government policies. American Indian communities' projects in U.S. and Canada to sustain spiritual and material connection to natural world. [3] (US)

HIST1431 - The United States in the 1990sThe 1990s as a key decade of economic, political, and cultural change in the United States. End of the Cold War and Reagan era. Rise of post-industrial economy, polarization, and "culture wars." Transformations in media technologies, music, and film. [3] (US)

HIST1438 - African American History to 1865Political, cultural, socioeconomic, and intellectual history of African Americans from their arrival in colonial America through the end of the U.S. Civil War. History of and resistance to slavery. [3] (US)

HIST1440 - African American History since 1877The political, socioeconomic, and intellectual history of African American people from the end of Reconstruction to the present. Special emphasis on African American cultural and institutional history and the twentieth-century protest movements. [3] (US)

HIST1469 - Fútbol-Soccer: Latinx, Gender, and BelongingRecurring topics and debates in sports history; differences in academic and popular history of sport. Changing agendas of sports history, including emphases on transnational and imperial processes. Perspectives on questions of power and social hierarchies as these relate to popular culture and belonging. [3] (US) HIST1470 - History of Exploration

Recurring topics and debates in sports history; differences in academic and popular history of sport. Changing agendas of sports history, including emphases on transnational and imperial processes. Perspectives on questions of power and social hierarchies as these relate to popular culture and belonging. [3] (US) HIST1470 - History of ExplorationAntiquity to the present. Voyages of discovery, including land expeditions and exploration of extreme depths, high altitudes, and outer space. Technologies of travel and measurement. Voyaging as exploration of the self.Cultural shifts as consequences of encounters with new places and peoples. [3] (INT)

HIST1480 - The Darwinian RevolutionIntellectual structure and social context of evolutionary ideas from 1700 to the present. Pre-Darwinian evolutionary theories. Darwin's life and work. Racial theories and eugenics. Comparative reception of Darwinism in the United States and Europe. Conflict between science and religion. [3] (P)

HIST1500 - History of Modern Sciences and SocietyThe end of the Scientific Revolution to the present. Sciences arising from the fields of Natural Philosophy (physics, astronomy, mathematics, and chemistry) and Natural History (geology and the life sciences). The clockwork universe, atomism and the Chemical Revolution; evolutionary theory (physical, geological, and biological); thermodynamics; and quantum theory. Colonial empires, industry, professional specialization, cultural modernism, and nuclear fear. [3] (P)

HIST1510 - The Scientific RevolutionThe production and dissemination of knowledge of the natural world during the period of the Scientific Revolution, covering roughly from 1450 to 1700. Cosmology and astrology, navigation, alchemy, religion and philosophy, and medicine. [3] (P)

HIST1510L - Scientific Revolution Digital History LabOptional lab accompanying HIST 1510. Digital history tools and building digital projects. Prerequisite or corequisite: 1510. [1] (No AXLE credit)

HIST1515 - Virtual Reality and the HumanitiesWorkshop in humanistic dimensions of interactive immersive environments including video games andsimulations. History and theory of the medium as well as tools and practices in their creation. [3] (HCA) HIST1520 - Science and the Sea

simulations. History and theory of the medium as well as tools and practices in their creation. [3] (HCA) HIST1520 - Science and the SeaHistories of science and environment. Effect of science on our conception of the ocean; effect of working at sea on our practice of science. Navigators' travel journals, oceanographers' reports, and recent writings by historians of ocean science. [3] (P)

HIST1525 - Global History of PestsBeginnings of sedentary agriculture to present with emphasis on modern period. Cultural, social, political, and economic aspects. Catastrophes and religion. Insects and empire. Public health and changing views of disease vectors. Language of pests and race. Impact of pesticides. Food production. Environmental justice. [3] (SBS) HIST1530 - Climate History

Beginnings of sedentary agriculture to present with emphasis on modern period. Cultural, social, political, and economic aspects. Catastrophes and religion. Insects and empire. Public health and changing views of disease vectors. Language of pests and race. Impact of pesticides. Food production. Environmental justice. [3] (SBS) HIST1530 - Climate HistoryEarly modern period to the present. Cultural, social, political, and economic aspects. The Little Ice Age, imperial expansion, and resistance. Scientific knowledge of environmental change. Capitalism, famine, and natural disasters. Climate change and the future. Environmental justice. [3] (INT)

HIST1580 - Crime and Punishment in Early Modern Europe 1400-1800Changing definitions of crime, the classification of criminals, and the nature of punishment. "Real" crimes such as vagrancy, theft, and murder; imaginary crimes such as Jewish ritual murder and witchcraft. Connections with long-term social, legal, and cultural transformations. [3] (HCA)

HIST1582W - Witchcraft, supernatural phenomena, and print culture in England, 1558-1650Role of printed broadsides, woodcuts, pamphlets, and treatises in spreading and influencing ideas about the supernatural. Responses to demonic possession, "monstrous" events, and magic. Social, legal, cultural, and religious contexts. Influence of expectations about gender and class. Development of theological and skeptical views. [3] (INT)

HIST1583 - History of German ThoughtFrom the Enlightenment to the present. German philosophy and critical theory in their social and political context. History of German intellectual movements. German thought as part of German culture. Taught in English. [3] (HCA)

HIST1584W - Foreigners and Citizens: Law and Rights in Modern EuropeFrench Revolution to late 20th century. Laws, institutions, and debates over citizenship and human rights.Experiences of refuge, migration, assimilation, and ethnic cleansing. Influence of nationalism, communism, liberalism, secularism, and multiculturalism on discourses of civil and human rights. [3] (INT)

HIST1586W - Nazi Germany, the Holocaust, and Digital HumanitiesLocal studies of Nazi Germany and the Holocaust using the tools of digital humanities. Map-generation using Arc-GIS and data linking. [3] (INT)

HIST1600 - European Economic History, 1000-1700From the commercial revolution of High Middle Ages to Industrial Revolution. Interconnections of economic forces with politics, society, and cultures. Rise of long distance trade; development of business and accounting techniques; public finance; monetary trends; advent of capitalist ethic. [3] (SBS)

HIST1605 - Economic Thought in Historical PerspectiveEconomic thinkers and ideas from Antiquity to the Modern Era. Comparative, cross-cultural and international contexts, including America, Europe, China, Africa, India and the Middle East. Impact on institutions and economic organization. [3] (SBS)

HIST1610 - Global History of DebtConcepts of credit and debt. Rise of credit economy, debt and imperialism, globalization of sovereign borrowing, gold standard and international finance, and debt crises. Morality and laws of debt; political dimensions of aid and indebtedness. [3] (P)

HIST1640 - History of American Capitalismhe development of American capitalism from the colonial period to the twenty-first century. The reasons for and effects of capitalist growth; the ways in which a largely agrarian society emerged as an industrial and commercial leader and shaped the ways Americans produced and lived. The political, social, and cultural dimensions of economic change. The global context of American development. [3] (US)

HIST1660 - American EnterpriseEvolution of the form, organization, and structure of the American business firm from colonial times to the present. Entrepreneurs, labor management, financial capital, distribution, invention, and government regulation.[3] (US)

HIST1665 - Capital, Labor, and Democracy in the United StatesNineteenth century to present. Tensions and connections between capitalism and democracy. Basic introduction to the social and political history of workers, business, politics, and organized labor. Questions of power and economic inequality as expressed in American political culture. [3] US

HIST1667 - Famous American TrialsSalem witchcraft trials, Aaron Burr's treason trial, Emmett Till murder trial, and O.J. Simpson's murder trial as lenses to examine central themes in American culture, history, and memory. [3] (US)

HIST1669 - Making the Case for Civil RightsCourt cases and contexts that framed the 20th century struggle for African American civil rights. Not open to students who have earned credit for HIST 2690 without permission. [3] (HCA)

HIST1690 - Sea Power in HistoryU.S. Navy's role in foreign and defense policies from the American Revolution to the present. Broad principles, concepts, and elements of sea power throughout history. Technological advances, interservice relations, strategies, and governmental policies pertaining to sea power. Designed to meet the NROTC requirement.Offered on a graded basis only. [3] (US)

HIST1691 - Evolution of WarfareAntiquity to the present. Evolution of strategic principles. Influence of technological, economic, moral, psychological, and political factors. Case studies from a soldier's perspective. Repeat credit for students who have completed NS 2311. [3] (No AXLE credit)

HIST1693 - Fundamentals of Maneuver Warfare[Replaces HIST 1692 Amphibious Warfare] Broad aspects of warfare and their interactions with maneuver warfare doctrine. Focus on the United States Marine Corps as the premier maneuver warfare fighting institution.

HIST1699 - Militarization in 20th Century American SocietyMilitarization as shaping 20th century American society. Conscription and citizenship; meanings of national identity; martial masculinities and femininities; impacts of war on racial politics; militarized welfare state; Cold War urbanisms; and militarized policing. [3] (US)

HIST1700 - Western Military History to 1815HIST1710W - Writing for Social ChangeCourse DescriptionPractice of narrative, nonfiction writing for social change. History of American investigative journalism and scholarship. Interviewing, research, narrative and revision skills. [3] (HCA)

HIST1710W - Writing for Social ChangePractice of narrative, nonfiction writing for social change. History of American investigative journalism and scholarship. Interviewing, research, narrative and revision skills. [3] (HCA)

HIST1725W - United States and the Middle EastU.S. involvement in the Middle East with emphasis on the period after 1945. Special attention on the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. Offered on a graded basis only. [3] (US)

HIST1730 - The U.S. and the Cold WarU.S. history, 1945-1991. Emphasis on foreign policy and competition with Soviet Union. Impact of Cold War on American society. [3] (US)

HIST1735W - United States Intelligence Community, 1940 to the presentIntelligence collection and analysis, covert action, and espionage in American foreign policy from World War II through the Cold War and 9/11. Legislative efforts to regulate and restrain. Contemporary dilemmas with terrorism, great power conflict, and technological advances. [3] (US)

HIST1740 - The U.S. and the Vietnam WarOrigins of American involvement, the reasons for escalation, and the Vietnamese response to intervention. The impact on America's domestic politics, the growth of the anti-war movement, and the economic, social, and cultural effects of the conflict. [3] (US)

HIST1760 - History of Christian TraditionsOrigins to the present. Jewish origins, formation of a Catholic tradition, church-state relations, and the social and cultural contexts of changing Christian beliefs and practices. [3] (HCA)

HIST1770 - United States' Religious HistoryReligion's influence on the body politic and culture of society. Readings from several religious communities. How race, gender, and ethnicity shape religious identity. [3] (US)

HIST1780W - Self and Society in the United StatesSelfhood and identity development from the early Republic to the present. The role of race, class, and gender but also religion, politics, work, technology, and media in shaping selves in the United States. Readings include autobiographies, fiction, etiquette manuals, advertisements, and scientific tracts. Offered on a graded basis only. [3] (HCA)

HIST1882W - Japan Through Historical FictionPremodern and modern history of Japan through works of Japanese historical fiction. Culture, religion, and society. Relationship between history and literature. [3] (INT)

HIST2100 - Politics and Catastrophe in Modern ChinaInfluence of politics on culture, society, government, and the military. The Cultural Revolution to Tiananmen Square. [3] (INT)

HIST2102 - Introduction to BrazilA multidisciplinary survey of Brazil from pre-Columbian times to the present, emphasizing culture, economic and political patterns, social issues, literature, and the arts in historical perspective. [3] (INT)

HIST2105 - Chinese ThoughtConfucianism and Philosophical Daoism. The Confucian Four Books, the Daodejing (Laozi), Zhuangzi, and Neo-Confucianism. [3] (INT)

HIST2106 - A Global History of TeaOrigins in China to its spread around the world. Role of tea in culture and world events, as a driver of commerce, science, and exploration. Links to Buddhism and political power in East Asia. Diverse functions in different cultures. Tea as trade commodity. Manner of preparation and use. [3] (INT)

HIST2107 - Chinese Economic HistoryChina's economic history from the Bronze Age to the present. Creation and development of markets. Links among political power, transportation, trade, and money. 12th century proto-Industrial Revolution, early modernization, Communism, and hybrid free market under socialism. Prerequisite: 1060 or 1070 [3] (INT) HIST2108 - Environment and Economy in China since 1700

China's economic history from the Bronze Age to the present. Creation and development of markets. Links among political power, transportation, trade, and money. 12th century proto-Industrial Revolution, early modernization, Communism, and hybrid free market under socialism. Prerequisite: 1060 or 1070 [3] (INT) HIST2108 - Environment and Economy in China since 1700Economic activities and their interactions with the environment. Long-term patterns in imperial China, with focus on the modern period. Water control and the Chinese state. Property rights and resource management.Demography and food security. Waste and recycling. Development, revolution, and nature. Global China and ecological civilization. [3] (INT)

HIST2108W - Environment and Economy in China since 1700Economic activities and their interactions with the environment. Long-term patterns in imperial China and the modern period. Water control and the Chinese state. Property rights and resource management. Demography and food security. Waste and recycling. Development, revolution, and nature. Global China and ecological civilization. [3] (INT)

HIST2110 - Crisis Simulation in East AsiaStrategic motivations and behaviors of international actors. Simulations of the decision-making process during critical historical moments in the East Asian context through role-playing and video games. Offered on a graded basis only. [3] (INT)

HIST2111 - China and the United States: Intertwined HistoriesCultural, social, and economic interactions 1700s to the present. Chinese porcelain and tea trade in colonial America; American involvement in opium trade. Chinese students in the United States; American missionaries in China. Military conflicts and alliances. Mutual formation of cultural perceptions and misperceptions. [3] (P) HIST2114 - Premodern Japan

Cultural, social, and economic interactions 1700s to the present. Chinese porcelain and tea trade in colonial America; American involvement in opium trade. Chinese students in the United States; American missionaries in China. Military conflicts and alliances. Mutual formation of cultural perceptions and misperceptions. [3] (P) HIST2114 - Premodern JapanJapanese civilization from ancient times to the Meiji Restoration (1868). Connections between culture and politics; relations with neighboring regions in East Asia. [3] (INT)

HIST2115 - Play and Pleasure in Early Modern JapanCultural history of Tokugawa Japan (1603-1868), with emphasis on daily life and popular entertainment in the capital of the warrior government, Edo (present-day Tokyo). Woodblock prints, pleasure quarters, kabuki theatre, commoner carnivals, and popular literature. [3] (INT)

HIST2119 - Modern JapanThe political, social, economic, and cultural history of Japan in the nineteenth century to the present. Radical changes in the state, society, and economy and the effects of these changes on Japan's place in the world. [3]

HIST2120 - Japan's War and Postwar, 1931-1989Japan's war in Asia and the Pacific in the mid-twentieth century and its legacies. The effect of defeat on the nation; reconstruction efforts and economic success. Hirohito's death. [3] (INT)

HIST2130 - Russia: Old Regime to RevolutionRussian history from the early nineteenth-century old regime through the Russian Revolution of 1917. Culture, society, and serfdom; the Great Reforms, ideology, and radicalism; industrialization; modernity in an agrarian society; twentieth-century revolutions. [3] (INT)

HIST2135 - Russia: The U.S.S.R. and AfterwardRussian history since the 1917 Revolution. Overview of the old regime; revolution and civil war; the Soviet"Roaring '20s"; Stalinism and the totalitarianized society; World War II. Postwar Soviet society and culture; de-Stalinization and the sixties generation; Gorbachev, perestroika, and disintegration; contemporary history. [3]

HIST2137 - The Mandelas: Biography, Struggle, and LegaciesPersonal and political biographies of Nelson and Winnie Mandela. Their childhood, upbringing, education, professional and personal lives. Their legacies and lessons as global human rights icons through the anti-apartheid struggle, arrest, trials, imprisonment, freedom, presidency, and reconciliation. [3] (INT) HIST2138 - Blood Diamonds, Blood Oil, Commodities, and Conflicts in Africa

Personal and political biographies of Nelson and Winnie Mandela. Their childhood, upbringing, education, professional and personal lives. Their legacies and lessons as global human rights icons through the anti-apartheid struggle, arrest, trials, imprisonment, freedom, presidency, and reconciliation. [3] (INT) HIST2138 - Blood Diamonds, Blood Oil, Commodities, and Conflicts in Africa1870s to the present. Role of diamonds, gold, rubber, and oil in the resulting conflicts in modern Africa.Multinationals, mineral extraction, and politics. Poverty, war, child labor, and corruption. Local and international mining and mineral syndicates. Implications for Africans and their livelihoods. [3] (INT)

HIST2139 - Technology, Nature and Power in AfricaEarly modern to present. How politics and technology shape everyday life in Africa and have been shaped by competing groups. Critiques the narrative that Africa lacks technological sophistication. Shifting meanings of technology; Africa's role in global history of technology; forms of technological engagement including guns, radios, roads, nuclear power, and biometrics. [3] (P)

HIST2140 - The Mughal WorldMughal history from 1500-1750. The early modern world and Islamic empires. Akbar and Hindu-Musliminteractions in South Asia. Oriental despotism and the idea of the monarch. Gender and authority. English, Dutch, and Portuguese views. Trade and the decline of Mughal authority. Globalization, the rise of Indian entrepreneurs, and the East India company. [3] (INT)

HIST2150 - India and the Indian OceanCultures along the Indian Ocean coastline from Roman times to 1800, especially South Asia. Coastal societies and politics, Islam, pilgrimage and trade, economic zones, and cultural ties. Pirates, seafarers and merchants; diasporas and genealogies. The entry of European trading companies and debates on trade and empire. [3]

HIST2154 - Arabia Through the AgesEnvironmental, political, social, cultural, and religious history of the Arabian Peninsula. Ancient towns and kingdoms. Bedouins. Spice trade. Pre-Islamic religions; monotheism. Rise of the Wahhabi movement and the development of Salafism. Exploration of remote deserts by European adventurers. Ottoman and Britishcolonialism. Saudi Arabia from its foundation to the oil boom. Globalization. Offered on a graded basis only. [3]

HIST2155 - Muhammad and Early IslamEarly Arabian society, Judaism and Christianity in Arabia; Muhammad and the birth of Islam, the conquests, Islamization, Arabization; Jewish influences in early Islam, the medieval Islamic world. [3] (INT)

HIST2160 - Medicine in IslamEmergence of medicine in the Islamic world. Links with other traditions. Doctors and society; conventional medical practice in hospitals; prophetic medicine; Jewish and Christian doctors in Islam; pharmacology; developments in the nineteenth-century. Not open to students who have earned credit for HIST 1111 Section 21without permission. Total credit for this course and HIST 1111 Section 21 will not exceed 3 credit hours. Credit hours reduced from second course taken (or from test or transfer credit) as appropriate. [3] (INT)

HIST2170 - Islam and the CrusadesIdeology; successes and failures; history and character of Crusader enterprises in the Holy Land and elsewhere.Muslim religious, political, ideological, and social reactions. Islamic culture and the West; relations among Crusaders, Muslims, and Jews. [3] (P)

HIST2180 - Islamic Narratives: Narratives of IslamHistory and historiography in Arab Islam. Aims and uses of historical writing in the religious context. Comparison with other pre-modern cultures. Islamic and non-Islamic sources for Islamic history. Examples from the ancient world, early Islam, Middle Ages, and the political entity known as the Islamic State. [3] (HCA)

HIST2190 - Last Empire of IslamThe Ottoman "long nineteenth century," 1789 to 1923. The Reforms (Tanzimat), state patriotism, intercommunal relations, national "awakenings," and the emergence of a public sphere. Historiographical issues, such as perceptions of the empire as the "Sick Man of Europe" and debates over its decline. [3] (INT) HIST2205 - History of the Roman Republic

The Ottoman "long nineteenth century," 1789 to 1923. The Reforms (Tanzimat), state patriotism, intercommunal relations, national "awakenings," and the emergence of a public sphere. Historiographical issues, such as perceptions of the empire as the "Sick Man of Europe" and debates over its decline. [3] (INT) HIST2205 - History of the Roman RepublicThe growth and evolution of the Roman world, from the foundation of the city in the seventh century B.C. to the reign of Caesar Augustus. The Romans' unification of Italy, conquest of the Mediterranean and western Europe, adoption of Hellenism, and overthrow of the Republic. [3] (INT)

HIST2210 - History of the Roman EmpireThe Roman world from Augustus to the collapse of the western empire in the fifth century. Political, military, social, and religious history. Special attention given to problems arising from use of the primary sources as well as to controversies in modern scholarship. [3] (INT)

HIST2220 - Medieval and Renaissance Italy, 1000-1700Transformation of Italy from "medieval" society to the "Renaissance." Cultural, economic, and social developments, especially connections among wealth, status, and patronage. Meaning and applicability of the term "Renaissance." [3] (HCA)

HIST2230 - Medieval Europe, 1000-1350Economic expansion and the formation of national states; the medieval Church and the revival of learning in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries. [3] (INT)

HIST2237 - Democracy & Dictatorship: Ancient PoliticsPolitics and political culture between Greece and Rome. Athenian mass democracy and its critics. Hellenistic kingship. Roman Republicanism and transition to emperors. Rhetoric and mass communication. [3] (SBS) HIST2238 - Crime and Criminal Law in Western Antiquity

Politics and political culture between Greece and Rome. Athenian mass democracy and its critics. Hellenistic kingship. Roman Republicanism and transition to emperors. Rhetoric and mass communication. [3] (SBS) HIST2238 - Crime and Criminal Law in Western AntiquityAncient Athens and Rome. Social values and the quest for justice through the legal system. Definition of offenses, procedures, and penalties. Impact of social, economic, and legal status as well as gender. Serves as repeat credit for CLAS 3160. [3] (SBS)

HIST2239 - Sex and the Citizen: Women and the Law in United StatesLaw's relationship to gender and sexuality from the seventeenth century to the present. Legal categories of gender that have governed the household, the economy, and the political sphere. [3] (US)

HIST2240 - Sex LawLaw concerning marriage, adultery, and homosexuality. Roman, Canon, and Civil Law from Antiquity to the present. [3] (INT)

HIST2250 - Reformation EuropeThe political, intellectual, and social conditions underlying the Protestant revolt. The Reformation of Luther, Calvin, Zwingli, Loyola, and other religious reformers considered within the context of the general developments of sixteenth-century history. [3] (INT)

HIST2255 - Inventing the Modern Economy: Eighteenth-Century EuropeEconomic transformation and the development of Enlightenment political economy in eighteenth-century Europe. New patterns of economic growth and foundations of modern capitalism: colonial commodities and slavery; 'Consumer Revolution'; credit and lending; and industrialization. Political, social, and economic responses by philosophers such as Mandeville, Montesquieu, the physiocrats, and Smith. [3] (INT)

HIST2260 - Revolutionary Europe, 1789-1815Political, cultural, and economic upheavals in the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries; the French Revolution and Napoleon, romanticism, and early industrialization. Emphasis on Britain, France, and Germany.[3] (INT)

HIST2270 - Nineteenth-Century EuropeMajor political, social, economic, and cultural developments from 1815 to 1914. [3] (INT)

HIST2280 - Europe, 1900-1945Political, socioeconomic, cultural, and colonial history of Europe from 1914 to the fall of Hitler. [3] (INT) HIST2290 - Europe since 1945

Political, socioeconomic, cultural, and colonial history of Europe from 1914 to the fall of Hitler. [3] (INT) HIST2290 - Europe since 1945Origins of the Cold War; political and social transformations, East and West; the breakup of colonial empires; ideological and military tensions; intellectual and cultural trends. [3] (INT)

HIST2293 - Muslims in Modern EuropeEighteenth century to the present. Eastern and Western Europe. Legal, political, and cultural integration and discrimination; questions of secularism and religious freedom; and gender, family law, and democracy. Muslim responses to modernity and formation of global Islamic movements. [3] (HCA)

HIST2294 - Eastern Europe: Critical EncountersEastern Europe from Enlightenment to 1989. Nineteenth century imperial competition, birth of nation-states.Minority rights, World War II and the Holocaust, socialist experimentation, police state, and dissent. Revolutions of 1989. [3] (INT)

HIST2300 - Twentieth-Century GermanyThe turbulent history of Germany, as it went from authoritarian state to volatile democracy, to National Socialist dictatorship, to divided country, and to reunification. Special emphasis placed on the Nazi dictatorship, its origins and legacy. [3] (INT)

HIST2310 - France: Renaissance to RevolutionSocial and cultural history from 1515 to 1815. Conditions of life, ambitions, ideas, and tastes of the various social groups. Development of arts, music, and literature in a sociopolitical context. Causes and consequences of the French Revolution of 1789. [3] (INT)

HIST2340 - Modern FranceThe fall of Napoleon in 1815 to the present. Emphasis on politics. Major economic, social, cultural, and intellectual developments. [3] (INT)

HIST2380 - Shakespeare's Histories and HistoryReadings from a variety of plays by Shakespeare and his contemporaries. Significant political and cultural issues from the 1590s in early English history. [3] (HCA)

HIST2382 - The Rise of the TudorsCauses and course of the political crisis in the fifteenth century and the rise of the Tudor monarchy. Political and religious forces that drove the English Reformation and its immediate consequences. Serves as repeat credit for HIST 2385. [3] (HCA)

HIST2383 - A Monarchy Dissolved? From Good Queen Bess to the English Civil WarCreation of political stability out of the turmoil caused by the English Reformation and its dissolution only forty years later. The relationship between religion and politics, state and society. Serves as repeat credit for HIST3260. [3] (HCA)

HIST2385 - The Real TudorsMarital, dynastic history of the Tudors in relation to religious and political change through and after the English Reformation. Court politics, ideological conflict, and the rise of an increasingly confessionalized international politics. Offered on a graded basis only. Serves as repeat credit for HIST 2382. [3] (HCA)

HIST2410 - Victorian EnglandCultural values, liberal reform; urbanization; women and gender; imperialism. [3] (INT)

HIST2413 - Global History of WasteFrom nineteenth century to present. Environmental, cultural, economic and labor history of waste. Production, consumption and disposal practices. Environmental injustice and socio-economic inequalities associated with garbage and toxicity. Castaways as historical artifacts. Case studies of urban sewage, plastic and toxic pollutants, electronic waste, landfills, and recycling. Material culture studies and local site visits. Serves as repeat credit for students who have earned credit for HIST 2413W. [3] (P)

HIST2413W - Global History of WasteFrom nineteenth century to present. Environmental, cultural, economic, and labor history of waste. Production, consumption, and disposal practices. Environmental injustice and socio-economic inequalities associated with garbage and toxicity. Castaways as historical artifacts. Case studies of urban sewage, plastic and toxic pollutants, electronic waste, landfills, and recycling. Material culture studies and local site visits. [3] (P) HIST2450 - Reform, Crisis, and Independence in Latin America, 1700-1820

From nineteenth century to present. Environmental, cultural, economic, and labor history of waste. Production, consumption, and disposal practices. Environmental injustice and socio-economic inequalities associated with garbage and toxicity. Castaways as historical artifacts. Case studies of urban sewage, plastic and toxic pollutants, electronic waste, landfills, and recycling. Material culture studies and local site visits. [3] (P) HIST2450 - Reform, Crisis, and Independence in Latin America, 1700-1820Reorganization of the Spanish and Portuguese empires; maturation of transatlantic societies; and revolutions for independence. [3] (INT)

HIST2457 - Drug Trafficking and Society in Latin AmericaNarcotics trafficking between Latin America and the United States. Complexities of production, transport, and trade. U.S. drug policy and politics. The 'drug war'. Violence, social problems, and political issues related to drugs in Latin America. Representation of the drug trade and drug culture. [3] (INT)

HIST2470 - Revolutionary MexicoRevolutionary politics and radical expression in 20th century Mexico. Causes of popular unrest; violent political change; post-conflict state-building; government attempts to alter popular culture; radical muralism and graphic art; revolutionary expression and gender; literature and disenchantment. [3] (INT)

HIST2480 - Central AmericaIberian and Amerindian background, colonial society; independence; growth of the plantation economy; the U.S.presence; political and social revolutions in the twentieth century. [3] (INT)

HIST2490 - Brazilian CivilizationFrom pre-Columbian times to the present. Clash and fusion of Portuguese, Amerindian, and African cultures; sugar and slavery; coffee and industrialization; race relations; dictatorship and democracy in the twentieth century. [3] (INT)

HIST2510 - Reform and Revolution in Latin AmericaComparative analysis of revolutions and reform movements in twentieth-century Latin America focusing on land tenure, social classes, political culture, economic structures, and foreign influences. [3] (INT)

HIST2530 - African Religions in AmericasAn interdisciplinary study of Islam, Christianity, and Animist religions in pre-colonial Africa; their transformation and practice in the Americas. Case studies of Brazil, Cuba, and the American South. Material culture studies and visits to local museum exhibits. [3] (INT)

HIST2535 - Latin America and the United StatesThe complicated relationship between Latin America and the United States from the early nineteenth century to the present. Role of ideology, national security, economic interests, and cultural factors in shaping inter-American affairs. [3] (INT)

HIST2540 - Race and Nation in Latin AmericaLate nineteenth century to the present. Social, political, and cultural constructions of belonging. Citizenship and state building. Immigration, education, urbanization, civil and international wars, and gender and sexuality. Case studies draw from the Andes, Spanish Caribbean, Southern cone, and Brazil. [3] (INT)

HIST2542 - Cuba and the United StatesHIST2544 - Panama: Global CrossroadsCourse DescriptionPanama, its colonial history, ties to Colombia, French canal project, independence, and United States' control and intervention. Panama Canal and its worldwide significance. [3] (INT)

HIST2544 - Panama: Global CrossroadsPanama, its colonial history, ties to Colombia, French canal project, independence, and United States' control and intervention. Panama Canal and its worldwide significance. [3] (INT)

HIST2570 - Caribbean History, 1492-1983Amerindian society; age of encounter; imperial contest; slavery and abolition. U.S. influence; independence movements; cultural movements; invasion of Grenada. [3] (INT)

HIST2580 - American Indian History before 1850Indian nations' interaction with each other and with European colonies. Resistance and adaptation to colonialism. Early development of United States Indian policy. [3] (US)

HIST2590 - American Indian History since 1850American Indians in the United States and Canada. Their responses to government policies and other forces.Cultural, socioeconomic, and political change among Indian communities. [3] (US)

HIST2595W - Pirates, Plantations, and Power: The English Atlantic World, 1500-1688Elizabethan era to Glorious Revolution. Shift from piracy to colonization of Ireland and the Americas. Crosscultural contact, race formation, economies of empire, and migration. [3] (US)

HIST2610 - The Founding GenerationAmerican history from the 1760s to the 1820s. The Revolutionary War, the Constitution, formation of national government. Political conflict, national culture, commerce, diplomacy, and race and gender in an age of revolution. Primarily for Juniors and Seniors. [3] (US)

HIST2620 - The Old SouthThe South's origins in European expansion; the rise of the plantation economy and society, and its identification with slavery; the differing experiences of whites and blacks, planters and nonplanters; the relationship of the region to the larger United States; the Confederate attempt at independence and the collapse of the slave regime. [3] (US)

HIST2630 - The New SouthThe aftermath of war and emancipation and the era of Reconstruction; social change and dislocation in the late nineteenth century; the Populist Revolt; the origins of segregation and one-party politics. Twentieth-century efforts to modernize the region; the economic, political, and Civil Rights revolutions of the mid-twentieth century; the South in modern American society and politics. [3] (US)

HIST2640 - AppalachiaThe region from first European intrusions to the present. Frontier-era white-indigenous contact, antebellum society and economy, relations with the slave South, the Civil War and postwar politics, increasing social strainings, industrialization and labor conflict, poverty and outmigration. Examination of mountain culture, tourism, and the construction of the "hillbilly" image. [3] (US)

HIST2650W - Slavery, War, and Emancipation: United States History, 1820-1900Causes, events, and consequences of the U.S. Civil War. The battles of Reconstruction and their aftermath.Political elites, military leaders, and ordinary women, men, and children, including enslaved and newly emancipated African Americans. National and transnational dimensions of struggles over race, rights, slavery, and emancipation. [3] (US)

HIST2651 - Comparative Reconstructions in the United StatesComparative analysis of post- Civil War Reconstruction and modern Civil Rights Movement. Questions of citizenship, social change, state mobilization, and political power in parallel movements one hundred years apart. Enduring issues of the role of the state, social movements, political identities, and war in rebuilding U.S.institutions and laws with regard to race relations in United States. [3] (US)

HIST2655 - Historic Black NashvilleFrom settlement through the Civil War. Secondary literature and archival research to identify significant black history sites in Nashville. Not open to students who have earned credit for UNIV 2655. Offered on a graded basis only. [3] (US)

HIST2658 - Law and Society of the Seas, 1400-1900Maritime cultures and legal conflicts at sea. Lived experiences of sailors and captives. Strategies of states and navies. Violence at sea; piracy and mutinies. Offered on a graded basis only. [3] (INT)

HIST2660 - The Birth of Modern Capitalism and Human TraffickingClosure of the Atlantic slave trade in eighteenth and nineteenth-century Britain and the United States. State formation, the birth of modern human rights discourse, and ideas about compassionate capitalism. [3] (INT) HIST2662 - Slavery in the United States

Closure of the Atlantic slave trade in eighteenth and nineteenth-century Britain and the United States. State formation, the birth of modern human rights discourse, and ideas about compassionate capitalism. [3] (INT) HIST2662 - Slavery in the United StatesHistory of American slavery, from the formation of a slave power in the seventeenth century to the defeat of the slaveholders' republic in the wake of the Civil War. [3] (US)

HIST2684 - The History of Black PowerNineteenth to twenty-first centuries. History, impact, and legacies of black power politics broadly, and the Black Power Movement specifically, in the United States and abroad. [3] (HCA)

HIST2685 - Race and U.S. Visual CultureFrom the 1700s to the present. Iconic texts, major themes, and transformative figures in the representational history of African Americans. Art and photography as strategies for racial uplift. Intra-racial satire. Black entertainment culture and societal imagery. Issues of gender, class, and sexuality. [3] (P)

HIST2686 - Race, Rights, and the American DreamPrimarily post 1930s to the present. Exploration of the concept of the U.S. "American Dream." Emphasis on race, gender, class, and power dynamics as related to urban space, housing, work, and identity. Inequality, rights, and social action. Offered on a graded basis only. [3] (US)

HIST2689 - "Women of Color": History, Theorizing & Organizing in the United StatesExamines the historical roots of the term "Women of Color". Theories, politics, coalitions, and struggles that emerged in the United States from the late 1960s to the present. Offered on a graded basis only. [3] (US) HIST2690 - The Civil Rights Movement

Examines the historical roots of the term "Women of Color". Theories, politics, coalitions, and struggles that emerged in the United States from the late 1960s to the present. Offered on a graded basis only. [3] (US) HIST2690 - The Civil Rights MovementFollowing two decades of progress from Brown v. Board of Education in 1954 toward racial justice and equality in the United States. Leaders, organizations, and milestones. Not open to students who have earned credit for HIST 1669 without permission. [3] (US)

HIST2691 - Barack Obama: Man and PresidentExamination of Obama's presidency. Exploration of background influences and their impact in domestic & foreign affairs. [3] (US)

HIST2692W - Biographies of StruggleStruggles for social justice. Identity, politics, and protest. Exploration of issues, traditions, and targets.Biography, personal testimonies, and oral life narratives of people engaged in efforts to challenge oppression.[3] (US)

HIST2700 - The U.S. and the WorldFrom the winning of independence to the Great Depression. Relationships among foreign policy, ideology, domestic politics, and social and economic change. [3] (US)

HIST2710 - The U.S. as a World PowerFrom the origins of World War II, through the Cold War, to the present day. Relationships among foreign policy ideology, domestic politics, and social economic change. [3] (US)

HIST2720 - World War IIOrigins and causes of the global conflict; the six years of military campaigns; politics and diplomacy of war-making; race as a factor shaping the war in Europe and Asia. Impact of technological innovations; social and economic aspects of the struggle, as well as its moral and psychological implications. [3] (INT)

HIST2721 - Globalizing American History, 1870-1940Immigration; diasporic social movements; transnational social reform campaigns; military, colonial, and corporate empire-building; expansion of missionary activity; United States' participation in World War I. [3] (US) HIST2722 - Globalizing American History, 1940-2010

Immigration; diasporic social movements; transnational social reform campaigns; military, colonial, and corporate empire-building; expansion of missionary activity; United States' participation in World War I. [3] (US) HIST2722 - Globalizing American History, 1940-2010The rise of U.S. world power after 1940 and the transformation of American society through its global interactions. Impact of transnational mobility and communications, connected social movements, war and militarization, and mass immigration. [3] (US)

HIST2725 - Race, Power, and ModernityHistorical approaches to race as a modern system of power and difference. The United States experience in comparative and transnational perspective. Race as an historical and socially-constructed ideological system.Race intersecting with nationality, region, class and gender. Race in the making of space, citizenship, and economic institutions. [3] (US)

HIST2730 - American MasculinitiesChanging definitions of manhood and masculinity from the colonial period to the post-9/11 era. The rise of democratic politics, industrialization, slavery and emancipation, feminist politics, and the growth of the global power of the United States. [3] (US)

HIST2735 - Debating America in the World, 1890-2010Debates about the U.S. role in shaping the twentieth century. War; colonialism and anti-colonialism; immigration; participation in international institutions. [3] (US)

HIST2740 - Immigration, the United States, and the WorldMid-nineteenth century to present. Relationship between U.S. immigration policy and politics; international relations. Impacts of war, diplomacy, and international pressure on U.S. immigration policy. [3] (US) HIST2749 - American Thought to 1865

Mid-nineteenth century to present. Relationship between U.S. immigration policy and politics; international relations. Impacts of war, diplomacy, and international pressure on U.S. immigration policy. [3] (US) HIST2749 - American Thought to 1865U.S. intellectual tradition from the colonial era to the Civil War. Popular thinkers and elite intellectuals including John Winthrop, Thomas Jefferson, Frederick Douglass, and Abraham Lincoln. Race, slavery, nation, and gender.Intellectual movements ranging from abolitionism to Social Darwinism. [3] (US)

HIST2750 - American Intellectual History since 1865Modern U.S. social thought. Debates over progress, science, nationalism, race, and economy. Ideas in their cultural context. Popular as well as elite thinkers. [3] (HCA)

HIST2750W - American Intellectual History since 1865Modern U.S. social thought. Debates over progress, science, nationalism, race, and economy. Ideas in their cultural context. Popular as well as elite thinkers. Repeat credit for students who have earned credit for HIST2750. [3] (HCA)

HIST2752 - African American Intellectual History Since 1776From the American Revolution to the present. Phillis Wheatley, Frederick Douglass, W.E.B. Du Bois, Amy Jacques Garvey, and Barack Obama. Black abolitionism, Pan-Africanism, black internationalism, Marxism, and black feminism. [3] (US)

HIST2760 - The Historian and the LawContemporary legal history and the role of law in shaping historical research. Doctrinal history, legal culture, colonial encounters, and crime and violence. Formal versus informal modes of state and community control and sanction. Serves as repeat credit for students who have earned credit for HIST 2760W. [3] (SBS)

HIST2760W - The Historian and the LawContemporary legal history and the role of law in shaping historical research. Doctrinal history, legal culture, colonial encounters, and crime and violence. Formal versus informal modes of state and community control and sanction. Serves as repeat credit for students who have earned credit for HIST 2760. [3] (SBS)

HIST2780 - Superhuman CivilizationTrends in human biological enhancement through the re-engineering of basic physical and mental traits.Debates over transhumanism, designer babies, neuroethics, and technological determinism. Long-termimplications for social justice and human identity. [3] (P)

HIST2790 - Human FlourishingTwo millennia of interdisciplinary debates over the nature and causes of happiness, meaningful experiences, and a life well-lived. Ancient Asia and Greece to contemporary Positive Psychology. Global, national, personal, and spiritual dimensions. Human agency and impactful choices in processes of societal and individual change.[3] (P)

HIST2800 - Modern MedicineScientific, social, and cultural factors influencing the rise of modern medicine. Europe and the U.S., 1750 to the present. [3] (P)

HIST2810 - Women, Health, and SexualityWomen as patients and healers in the U.S. from 1750 to the present. Topics include women's diseases and treatments; medical constructions of gender, sexuality; childbirth, birth control, abortion; midwives, nurses, and doctors. [3] (US)

HIST2835 - Sexuality and Gender in the Western Tradition to 1700Politics, war, and masculinity; Christianity and sexuality; changing ideas about gender roles and sexual practices. [3] (P)

HIST2840 - Sexuality and Gender in the Western Tradition since 1700Modern masculinity, femininity, and gender roles; origins of identity politics and changing sexual norms; contemporary feminist issues. [3] (P)

HIST2845 - Race, Gender, and Slave EmancipationComparative and Atlantic world history. Haiti, United States, Caribbean, Brazil, and South Africa. Novels, plays, and slave narratives. Slavery and post-emancipation. [3] (INT)

HIST2855 - Women and Gender in the U.S. to 1865Social and cultural history of gender, race, and sexuality as represented in literary, legal and artistic texts.Exploration of Native American conquest, captivity narratives, abolitionism and sentimental fiction, nationalism and gender ideas. [3] (US)

HIST2860 - Women and Gender in the U.S. since 1865Social and cultural history of the intertwined ideas and practices of gender, race, and sexuality. Exploration of experiences, representations, and activism in feminist and gay rights movements, interracial unions, marriage and the family, black women's activism, suffrage, and sexual revolutions. [3] (US)

HIST3000W - The History WorkshopIntroduction to the "historian's craft." Reconstructing the past using primary documents such as diaries, letters, memoirs, and declassified government papers. Methods of historical research and reasoning through individual projects. Offered on a graded basis only. [3] (SBS)

HIST3010 - Pornography and Prostitution in HistoryCommercialization of the sex trade, Renaissance to the present. Political scandal, capitalism, and globalization; effects of technological change, from the printing press to the Internet. Readings from anthropology, psychology, and feminist theory. [3] (P)

HIST3040 - Health and the African American ExperienceDisparities in the health care of African Americans, the training of black professionals, and the role of black medical institutions. The intersection between black civic involvement and health care delivery; the disproportionate impact of disease and epidemics within the African American population. [3] (US)

HIST3045W - Eugenics in the U.S., 1865-presentComparative perspective. Compulsory sterilization, restrictive immigration acts, "fitter family" contests, medical genetics, and eugenic counseling. Ideas and practices shaped by attitudes toward race, gender, class, and disability. [3] (US)

HIST3050 - InnovationOrigin, reception, and cultural impact of technological innovation. New technologies from the mid-nineteenth century through present-day Silicon Valley and their technical, social, economic, and political dimensions. [3] (P) HIST3070W - Science, Technology, and Modernity

Origin, reception, and cultural impact of technological innovation. New technologies from the mid-nineteenth century through present-day Silicon Valley and their technical, social, economic, and political dimensions. [3] (P) HIST3070W - Science, Technology, and ModernitySocial, cultural, intellectual, and artistic responses to the challenges posed by modern science and technology from the mid-nineteenth to the mid-twentieth centuries. Offered on a graded basis only. [3] (P)

HIST3090 - Tokyo: History and ImageTokyo and its representation in various media from the mid-nineteenth century to the present and imaginings of the future. The city's physical development and image in photographs, films, novels, essays, and other textual and visual materials produced within Japan and beyond. [3] (INT)

HIST3100 - Pirates of the CaribbeanImperial competition for control of the Caribbean and state-sponsored piracy. The economic and political consequences of piracy in the Caribbean. The life of pirates aboard ship and in port. [3] (INT)

HIST3110 - Trade and Politics in Monsoon Asia, 1400-1800Early modern maritime Asia. Economic dynamics, trade networks, and political engagements. Commercial and monetary connections. Material culture and conspicuous consumption. The Great Divergence. Clashes of empires. Changing maritime policies and economic thought. Pirates, smugglers, and warlords. Migration and mixed identities. [3] (INT)

HIST3111 - Debates in Chinese HistoryHIST3112W - China and the WorldCourse DescriptionChina's role in global currents since the seventeenth century. China as engine of early-modern global trade. The Chinese diaspora's transnational impact. Cosmopolitan semi-colonial cities (such as Shanghai) as incubators of global modernity. China as an innovator and exporter of cultural "goods" in the twentieth century, from revolution to medicine. Offered on a graded basis only. Repeat credit for students who have earned credit for HIST 3112. [3] (INT)

HIST3112W - China and the WorldChina's role in global currents since the seventeenth century. China as engine of early-modern global trade. The Chinese diaspora's transnational impact. Cosmopolitan semi-colonial cities (such as Shanghai) as incubators of global modernity. China as an innovator and exporter of cultural "goods" in the twentieth century, from revolution to medicine. Offered on a graded basis only. Repeat credit for students who have earned credit for HIST 3112. [3] (INT)

HIST3120 - Weimar Germany: Modernism and Modernity, 1918-1933Culture and politics. Mass politics, mass media, economic crisis, and social tensions. Architecture, film, theater, painting, and philosophy. Serves as repeat credit for students who have earned credit for 3120W. [3] (HCA) HIST3120W - Weimar Germany: Modernism and Modernity, 1918-1933

Culture and politics. Mass politics, mass media, economic crisis, and social tensions. Architecture, film, theater, painting, and philosophy. Serves as repeat credit for students who have earned credit for 3120W. [3] (HCA) HIST3120W - Weimar Germany: Modernism and Modernity, 1918-1933Politics and culture. Mass media, economic crisis, and social tensions. Architecture, film, theater, painting, and philosophy. Serves as repeat credit for students who have earned credit for 3120. [3] (HCA)

HIST3140 - History of New OrleansThe city since its founding. Interactions between urban society and natural environment; historical and cultural significance of New Orleans in light of post-Katrina disaster and reconstruction. [3] (US)

HIST3150 - Cities of Europe and the Middle EastCities of "East" and "West" in the modern period; distinguishing characteristics and shared patterns of urban modernity across different geographies. Conceptions of the European, Middle Eastern, and Islamic metropolis.[3] (INT)

HIST3170 - The Federalist PapersClassic works on American constitutionalism and government and their views on human nature andrepublicanism. The framers' rejection of democracy and fear of legislative abuses. The Constitution's emphasis on institutional protections for liberty and checking abuses of power. [3] (US)

HIST3180 - Making of Modern ParisThe social and cultural history of Paris from the old regime to the present. Paris versus the French provinces; revolutionary upheavals; challenges of rapid urbanization. Paris as a literary, artistic, and consumer capital; its changing physical landscape. Immigration and the globalization of Paris. [3] (INT)

HIST3190 - Religion, Culture, and Commerce: The World Economy in Historical PerspectiveCross-cultural trade in a broad chronological and geographical framework. Pre-modern and modern times, western and non-western locales. The role of religion in economic exchange and the movement of commodities.Offered on a graded basis only. [3] (HCA)

HIST3200 - Poverty, Economy, and Society in Sub-Saharan AfricaHistory of poverty from pre-colonial times to the present. The evolution of economic systems and trading; impacts of trans-oceanic slave, commodity trading, and colonialism on Africans' standards of living; contemporary African economic challenges of underdevelopment, debt, foreign aid, fair trade, and globalization.[3] (INT)

HIST3209 - Sex, Marriage, and the Body in Islamic LawIslamic laws related to gender from the seventh century to the present. Qur'an and the Hadith on veiling, marriage, adultery, and men's and women's dress. Differences between Sunni and Shi'ite inheritance codes.Medieval jurists' understanding of reproduction and pregnancy. Modern developments, ranging from the movement for equal voting rights to new technologies such as ultrasounds. Offered on a graded basis only. [3]

HIST3210 - Muslims, Christians, and Jews in Medieval SpainCoexistence and conflict from 711 to 1492. The blend of cultures, languages, religions, and societies under both Christian and Islamic rule. Offered on a graded basis only. Not open to students who have earned credit for JS1111 Section 01 without permission. Total credit for this course and JS 1111 Section 01 will not exceed 3 credit hours. Credit hours reduced from second course taken (or from test or transfer credit) as appropriate. [3] (INT) HIST3215 - The Other 1492: Muslims and Jews in Iberia and Beyond

1111 Section 01 without permission. Total credit for this course and JS 1111 Section 01 will not exceed 3 credit hours. Credit hours reduced from second course taken (or from test or transfer credit) as appropriate. [3] (INT) HIST3215 - The Other 1492: Muslims and Jews in Iberia and BeyondHistory of Muslims and Jews in Iberia and diaspora from the Medieval through modern eras. Muslim Spain (Al-Andalus) and Christian Spain; forced conversions, the Inquisition, expulsion, resettlement, and real and imagined return. [3] (INT)

HIST3220W - Images of IndiaImages in and of South Asia as studied through maps, religious imagery, print culture, cinema, and architecture.The politics of visual stereotypes of India. The visual history of Orientalism, modernity, gender, and religion in South Asia. [3] (INT)

HIST3230 - The Art of EmpireVisual media in the establishment of modern empires, with emphasis on Western Europe. Image-making and power; art in cultural exchange and the definition of race, ethnicity, and gender. [3] (HCA)

HIST3260 - Revolutionary England, 1603-1710Causes, nature, and consequences of the English Revolution and the Glorious Revolution. Religious struggle, the fiscal-military state; political thought; parliament and party politics. The Stuart dynasty; the English Republic; court culture and civil war. Serves as repeat credit for HIST 2383. [3] (HCA)

HIST3270 - Religion and the Occult in Early Modern EuropePopular and learned ideas about religion and the supernatural within the context of the religious reforms of the sixteenth century. Alchemical and astrological practices to ghosts, werewolves, fairies, and other supernatural beings. The witch craze phenomenon of 1560-1650. Offered on a graded basis only. [3] (HCA)

HIST3275 - Religion and Popular Culture in Nineteenth-Century EuropePopular religious beliefs and practices in their social, cultural, political, and gender contexts. Concentration on Britain, France, and Germany. Offered on a graded basis only. [3] (SBS)

HIST3280 - Popular Cultures in Modern Latin America1800 to the present. Music, theater, literature, art, dance, and religion. Cultural performance among popular groups and their attempts to construct, control, and commercialize expression. [3] (INT)

HIST3285 - Citizenship, Literature, and SlaveryLiterature, law, citizenship, and slavery; 19th century; comparative and transnational; literary and historiographical methods. [3] (INT)

HIST3290 - Nazism, Genocide, and the LawLegal responses to genocide in the aftermath of Nazism. Prosecution of Holocaust perpetrators and war criminals from Nuremberg Trials to today. Restitution and compensation. Later prosecution for crimes against humanity and its relation to post-WWII precedents. Transitional justice and witnessing. [3] (INT)

HIST3310W - Bible in the Greek WorldPolitics, language and culture in the Ancient Near East before and after Alexander. The Diaspora, Philo, and ancient libraries. The Septuagint's creation and translation in the Hellenistic world. Relation to the Bible and Christianity. Offered on a graded basis only. Not open to students who have earned credit for JS 2640 or JS2640W. [3] (HCA)

HIST3333 - Pandemics and Society in Historical PerspectiveReligious, racial, political, economic and human (psychological) consequences of global pandemics in the premodern world, from Antiquity to the Black Death (1348). Assess ways contagion transforms societies and its relation to concurrent issues of violence and social justice. [3] (HCA)

HIST3746 - Workshop in English and History(Also listed as English 3746) Team-taught by a historian and an interdisciplinary scholar. Explores intersection of disciplines through close examination of texts in historical context. May be repeated for credit more than once if there is no duplication in topic. Students may enroll in more than one section of this course each semester.Preference to students majoring in the English-History program. [3] (No AXLE credit)

HIST3850 - Independent StudyA program of reading in one field of history to be selected in consultation with an adviser. Normally limited to qualified majors in history. Approval of faculty adviser and director of undergraduate studies required. May be repeated for credit once if there is no duplication in topic and not twice from the same instructor, but students may earn only up to 3 credits per semester of enrollment. [1-3; maximum of 6 credits for all semesters of HIST

HIST3880 - Internship TrainingUnder faculty supervision, students from any discipline can gain experience in a broad range of public and private agencies, institutions, and programs. In some cases, such as historical societies or museums, history is a central part of the organization's missions; in other cases, the student will play a role in managing the institution's records or writing its history. Two options are available. (1) full-time: 12-15 hours total, including 6-9 hours in 3880, 3 hours in 3881, and 3 hours in 3882. (2) Part-time: 6-9 hours total, including 3-6 hours in 3880and 3 hours in either 3881or 3882. To be accepted for either option, students must have a 2.90 grade point average and 6 hours of prior work in history; they must submit a specific plan for the internship to the director of undergraduate studies. After completing the internship, all students must write a thorough report. Must be taken Pass/Fail and concurrently with 3881 and/or 3882. These hours may not be included in the minimum hours required for the history major. Corequisite: 3881 and/or 3882. [3-9] (No AXLE credit)

HIST3882 - Internship ReadingsUnder faculty supervision, students from any discipline can gain experience in a broad range of public and private agencies, institutions, and programs. In some cases, such as historical societies or museums, history is a central part of the organization's missions; in other cases, the student will play a role in managing the institution's records or writing its history. Two options are available. (1) full-time: 12-15 hours total, including 6-9 hours in 3880, 3 hours in 3881, and 3 hours in 3882. (2) Part-time: 6-9 hours total, including 3-6 hours in 3880and 3 hours in either 3881 or 3882. To be accepted for either option, students must have a 2.90 grade point average and 6 hours of prior work in history; they must submit a specific plan for the internship to the director of undergraduate studies. After completing the internship, all students must write a thorough report. Readings and a substantial interpretive essay on topics related to the internship training, under the supervision of a member of the Vanderbilt Department of History. Corequisite: 3880. [3] (No AXLE credit)

HIST3883 - Internship ResearchUnder faculty supervision, students from any discipline can gain experience in a broad range of public and private agencies, institutions, and programs. In some cases, such as historical societies or museums, history is a central part of the organization's missions; in other cases, the student will play a role in managing the institution's records or writing its history. Two options are available. (1) full-time: 12-15 hours total, including 6-9 hours in 3880, 3 hours in 3882, and 3 hours in 3883. (2) Part-time: 6-9 hours total, including 3-6 hours in 3880and 3 hours in either 3882 or 3883. To be accepted for either option, students must have a 2.90 grade point average and 6 hours of prior work in history; they must submit a specific plan for the internship to the director of undergraduate studies. After completing the internship, all students must write a thorough report. Students will write a substantial research paper under the supervision of a member of the Vanderbilt Department of History. Corequisite: 3880. [3] (No AXLE credit)

HIST3890 - Selected Topics in HistoryMay be repeated for credit more than once if there is no duplication in topic. Students may enroll in more than one section of this course each semester. [3] (No AXLE credit)

HIST3980W - Junior Honors Seminar in HistoryThe first semester of a three-semester sequence of honors study leading to the writing of an honors thesis in history. Introduction to historical thinking, research, and writing. Readings from the major fields of historical scholarship, representing the United States, Europe, Latin America, and Asia. Open to juniors beginning honors work in history, or to qualified history majors with the approval of the director of undergraduate studies. [3] (No AXLE credit)

HIST4444 - Project on Unity and American DemocracySpecial topics. Axle category may vary by department and topic. [3]

HIST4960 - Majors SeminarAdvanced reading, research, and writing. Topics vary. Offered on a graded basis only. Limited to juniors and seniors and intended primarily for history majors. Prerequisite: 3000W or 3980W. May be repeated for credit once if there is no duplication in topic. Students may enroll in more than one section of this course each semester. [3; maximum of 6 credits total for all semesters of HIST 4960] (No AXLE credit)

HIST4980 - Senior Honors Research SeminarPresentation and discussion of drafts and chapters of honors theses in progress. Offered on a graded basis only.Open only to senior departmental honors students. [3] (No AXLE credit)

HIST4981 - Senior Honors Research SeminarContinuation of 4980. Offered on a graded basis only. Open only to seniors in the departmental honors program.Prerequisite: 4980. Corequisite: 4999. [3] (No AXLE credit)

HIST4999 - Senior Honors ThesisWriting an honors thesis under the supervision of a thesis adviser and the Director of Honors. Open only to seniors in the departmental honors program. Offered on a graded basis only. Prerequisite: 4980. Corequisite 4981. [3] (No AXLE credit)

HART1001 - Commons iSeminarTopics vary. General Elective credit only. [1] (No AXLE credit)

HART1100 - History of Western Art: Ancient to MedievalVisual and material culture of Europe and the Ancient Near East from the Paleolithic through the late Medieval period. Egypt, Greece, and Rome; early Christianity and Islam. Form, content, and meaning of works of art and architecture in their cultural context. [3] (HCA)

HART1105 - History of Western Art: Renaiss to ModernMajor artistic movements from the Renaissance to the Modern era and the developments in painting, sculpture, and architecture. Works of specific artists and cultural factors that affect the visual arts from production to reception. [3] (HCA)

HART1111 - First-Year Writing SeminarIndependent learning and inquiry in an environment in which students can express knowledge and defend opinions through intensive class discussion, oral presentations, and written expression. May be repeated for credit once if there is no duplication of topic, but students may earn only up to 3 credits in any 1111 course per semester of enrollment. [3; maximum of 6 credits total for all semesters of 1111] (AXLE credit category varies by section)

HART1120 - History of Western ArchitectureArchitecture in Europe, Western Asia, and North America from the early first millennium BCE to the present.Form and function; historical, social, and spatial contexts; architects and patrons. Not open to students who have earned credit for HART 1121 without permission. Total credit for this course and HART 1121 will not exceed 5 hours. Credit hours reduced from second course taken (or from test or transfer credit) as appropriate. [3]

HART1121 - History of Western Architecture IFrom prehistoric Europe and Western Asia to Renaissance Italy and the Ottoman Golden Age. Form andfunction; historical, social, spatial contexts; architects and patrons. Not open to students who have earned credit for HART 1120 without permission. Total credit for this course and HART 1120 will not exceed 5 hours. Credit hours reduced from second course taken (or from test or transfer credit) as appropriate. [3] (HCA)

HART1122 - History of Western Architecture IIFrom 1700 to the present; Piranesi, Wren, Viollet-le-Duc, Wright, and Venturi. Buildings, urban schemes, and landscapes in relation to aesthetic, cultural, social, and political contexts. Later reappraisals by historians and designers; relevance to contemporary practice and discourse. Not open to students who have earned credit for HART 1120 without permission. Total credit for this course and HART 1120 will not exceed 5 hours. Credit hours reduced from second course taken (or from test or transfer credit) as appropriate. [3] (INT)

HART1200 - Arts of East AsiaA survey of sculpture, painting, and architecture in China, Japan, and Korea. Historical, religious, philosophical, and cultural background. [3] (INT)

HART1205 - Arts of South and Southeast AsiaSecond millennium BCE to present. Formation of political and social identities as reflected in artistic productions.Development of artistic traditions in response to cultural exchange and political dynamics. [3] (INT) HART1210W - Art and Ritual in Asia

Development of artistic traditions in response to cultural exchange and political dynamics. [3] (INT) HART1210W - Art and Ritual in AsiaFrom prehistory to the present. Social and religious functions of the arts of China, India, Japan, Korea, and Himalayas. Select examples explored in museum visits, lectures, discussions, and varied writing projects. [3]

HART1220 - History of Asian ArchitectureCultural traditions of Asia from the first millennium BCE to the nineteenth century through the study of architecture. Cities, temples, and domestic structures of China, Japan, Korea, South Asia (India and Pakistan), and Southeast Asia. [3] (INT)

HART1285W - Introduction to Medieval ArtFrom the third to fifteenth century; Late Antique period to Late Gothic period. Architecture, sculpture, painting, and the minor arts of Western Europe in historical context, including Byzantine and Islamic art. Not open to students who have earned credit for HART 2285 without permission. Total credit for this course and HART 2285will not exceed 3 hours. Credit hours reduced from second course taken (or from test or transfer credit) as appropriate. [3] (INT)

HART1300 - Monuments and MasterpiecesThe social and cultural history of the world in fourteen great works, including the Athenian Parthenon, the Pantheon in Rome, the Konjikido in Japan, Michelangelo's Sistine Chapel, and the U.S. Capitol. Sculpture, painting, architecture, and the decorative arts. [3] (INT)

HART1330W - Heaven on Earth: Sacred Sites in World HistoryFrom prehistory to the 19th century. Great works of world religious architecture in their social and cultural context. Monuments, temples, tombs, shrines, and other sacred sites. Cross-cultural and trans-historical comparative perspective. How formal attributes of space and architecture shape religious experience and meaning. [3] (SBS)

HART1400 - U.S. Icons and MonumentsFrom 1776 to present. How and why images of people, historical events, and symbols are revered. Implications for national identity, historical memory, consumerism, and political ideologies. The U.S. Capitol, Statue of Liberty, Mount Rushmore, Marilyn Monroe, and Michael Jordan. Not open to students who have earned credit for HART 1111 Section 13 without permission. Total credit for this course and HART 1111 Section 13 will not exceed 3 credit hours. Credit hours reduced from second course taken (or from test or transfer credit) as appropriate.[3] (US)

HART1500W - ImpressionismPainting style developed by Monet, Renoir, Pissarro, Cassatt, Morisot, and others, with emphasis on changing atmospheric effects. Work of the French Impressionists from formal, social, political, and intellectual perspectives. Impact of French Impressionism across Europe and North America. [3] (HCA)

HART1740W - Introduction to Design StudiesStrategies for understanding the reciprocal relationship between design and human experience. Historical and contemporary examples in fields including fashion, climate change, violence, activism, and public health. Social control, nationalism, history and memory, and othering practices. [3] (HCA)

HART1750W - African American ArtsBlackness and black culture as subject and context for African American visual arts from the 20th and 21st centuries. Emphasis on arts derived from African American cultural perspectives. Not open to students who have earned credit for HART 2750 without permission. Total credit for this course and HART 2750 will not exceed 3 hours. Credit hours reduced from second course taken (or from test or transfer credit) as appropriate. [3] (P) HART2100 - Architecture and the Mapping of Empire in Asia

Blackness and black culture as subject and context for African American visual arts from the 20th and 21st centuries. Emphasis on arts derived from African American cultural perspectives. Not open to students who have earned credit for HART 2750 without permission. Total credit for this course and HART 2750 will not exceed 3 hours. Credit hours reduced from second course taken (or from test or transfer credit) as appropriate. [3] (P) HART2100 - Architecture and the Mapping of Empire in AsiaUse of architecture to express and delimit empire in Asia from the 3rd century BCE through the 20th century CE.Cosmology in the construction of cities, temples, and tombs. Physical manifestations of divine kingship and royal divinities. Appropriation of ancient models to enhance legitimacy. Architecture as an expression of ethnic/state identities. [3] (P)

HART2110 - Arts of ChinaArtistic production from the Neolithic period through the Qing dynasty in relation to religious and cultural contexts. [3] (HCA)

HART2120 - Arts of KoreaHistory of Korean art and visual culture from ancient times to the present. Intersections of art, literature, religion, and politics, and cultural interactions with China and Japan. [3] (INT)

HART2130 - Arts of JapanArtistic production from the Neolithic through Meiji periods in relation to religious and cultural contexts. [3]

HART2150 - East Asian Architecture and GardensEast Asian religious, vernacular, and garden architecture from the second century CE to the present. Influence of Buddhism on East Asian architecture, fengshui, and site selection, garden as religious landscape, Asia in modern architecture. [3] (HCA)

HART2151 - Architecture and Gardens in Imperial ChinaBuilt environment of imperial China from the 2nd century BCE to the 19th century. City planning, palaces, temples, monasteries, gardens, and vernacular architecture; historical developments and regional variation. [3]

HART2160 - Art and Architecture of Buddhist AsiaAppearance, creation, and function of Buddhist art works from South to East Asia. Iconographic and stylistic analysis of architecture, sculpture, painting, and other arts; relationship between ideology, text, and image; Buddhism and state formation. [3] (INT)

HART2165 - Modern and Contemporary Asian ArtArts of East, South, and Southeast Asia, 1800 to present, from the emergence of modernity to participation in the "global turn" in contemporary art. Painting, sculpture, architecture; new media including installation, performance, photography, film, and video. Social, political, and historical contexts. [3] (INT)

HART2170 - Religion and politics in South and Southeast Asian ArtUse of Buddhist, Hindu, and Jain images as political communication in South and Southeast Asia from the time of Buddha (480-400 BC) to the present. The original patronage of temples and religious icons, and their reappropriation in ancient and modern times. [3] (INT)

HART2175 - Modern and Contemporary Indian ArchitectureFrom nineteenth-century British colonial rule to the present. Built environment of Indian subcontinent in local and global contexts. Eighteenth-century Jaipur and urban planning, the British Raj, Calcutta, Allahabad, and Edwin Lutyens' New Delhi. Le Corbusier, Louis Kahn, the Neo-Gothic of Bombay, and contemporary architecture.[3] (INT)

HART2180 - Islamic Art and ArchitectureVisual and building traditions from the seventh through twentieth centuries. Cultural, sacred, political, and historical forces shaping art from Islamic Spain and Turkey to Iran and India. Dome of the Rock, the Alhambra, the Suleymaniye mosque, Persian illustrated manuscripts, and the Taj Mahal. [3] (INT)

HART2192 - Modern and Contemporary African Art1940 to present. Painting, sculpture, photography, performance and film examined in relationship to political, cultural, historical, and aesthetic contexts on and off the African continent. Tradition, colonialism and postcolonialism, diaspora, nationalism, and gender. Issues regarding collecting, exhibiting, and selling contemporary African art. [3] (INT)

1940 to present. Painting, sculpture, photography, performance and film examined in relationship to political, cultural, historical, and aesthetic contexts on and off the African continent. Tradition, colonialism and postcolonialism, diaspora, nationalism, and gender. Issues regarding collecting, exhibiting, and selling contemporary African art. [3] (INT)Comparative studies around the Mediterranean and adjacent regions, 4th millennium BCE to 4th century CE.Origins and evolution; environmental, social, and economic determinants of urban form; city planning and amenities; engineering and architecture. Formal, material, comparative, and theoretical approaches. [3] (SBS) HART2210 - Art and Architecture of Ancient Egypt

Origins and evolution; environmental, social, and economic determinants of urban form; city planning and amenities; engineering and architecture. Formal, material, comparative, and theoretical approaches. [3] (SBS) HART2210 - Art and Architecture of Ancient EgyptArt, architecture, and culture of Egypt from the fourth millennium through the Old, Middle, and New Kingdoms.Sculpture, wall painting, architecture, and material culture. [3] (HCA)

HART2214 - Art and Architecture of the Ancient AmericasVisual arts and built environments of indigenous South America, North America, and the Caribbean prior to European contact. Sacred, cultural, and historical influences on architecture and iconography. [3] (INT) HART2220 - Greek Art and Architecture

Visual arts and built environments of indigenous South America, North America, and the Caribbean prior to European contact. Sacred, cultural, and historical influences on architecture and iconography. [3] (INT) HART2220 - Greek Art and ArchitectureThe Bronze Age, including the Minoans and Myceneans, through the Hellenistic period. The social and cultural contexts of material and visual culture. Vase-painting, sculpture, architecture, and more utilitarian artifacts. [3]

HART2230 - Late Classical Greek and Hellenistic Art and ArchitectureSculpture, vase painting, architecture, and the minor arts from after the Parthenon to the Roman Empire. Media that developed significantly in this period, such as wall painting and mosaic. [3] (HCA)

HART2250 - Roman Art and ArchitectureSculpture, architecture, and painting from the tenth century B.C.E. to the early fourth century C.E. Daily life of the Romans as seen in excavations of the towns of Pompeii and Herculaneum. [3] (HCA)

HART2260 - The Art of Pagans, Christians, and JewsReligious art of the Roman Empire in late antiquity. Visual art reflecting religious beliefs and practices. Greco-Roman cults, early Christianity, and Rabbinical Judaism. [3] (HCA)

HART2270 - Early Christian and Byzantine ArtThe development of architecture, sculpture, painting, and the minor arts from the third through eleventh centuries. [3] (HCA)

HART2275 - The Cross and the Crescent: Byzantine-Islamic Confluences in ArtDevelopments at the interface of Byzantium and early Muslim empires, ca. 500-1000 C.E. Cross-cultural processes shaping visual sensibilities. Doctrinal issues and aniconism mirrored in architecture, ornament, mosaics, illuminated manuscripts, coinage. Exemplary sites: San Vitale in Ravenna, Hagia Sophia in Istanbul, Dome of the Rock in Jerusalem, and the Umayyad mosque in Damascus. [3] (INT)

HART2285 - Medieval ArtThe development of architecture, sculpture, painting, and the minor arts in Europe from the eleventh through the fifteenth centuries. Not open to students who have earned credit for HART 1285W without permission. Total credit for this course and HART 1285W will not exceed 3 hours. Credit hours reduced from second course taken (or from test or transfer credit) as appropriate. [3] (HCA)

HART2288 - Art of the BookMaterial and visual composition of medieval manuscripts; working with medieval and contemporary artists'books in Vanderbilt's Special Collections. Audience, changing popularity of texts and illustrations, and concerns of patrons and artists. Exemplary works include the "Book of Kells," "Luttrell Psalter," and "Tres Riches Heures."Offered on a graded basis only. [3] (HCA)

HART2290 - Gothic ParisFrom the twelfth to the fifteenth century. Architecture, sculpture, painting, and the luxury arts. [3] (INT) HART2310 - Italian Art to 1500

From the twelfth to the fifteenth century. Architecture, sculpture, painting, and the luxury arts. [3] (INT) HART2310 - Italian Art to 1500Early development of art and architecture primarily in central Italy from the late thirteenth through the fifteenth centuries. The works of Giotto, Duccio, Donatello, Masaccio, and Botticelli. The age of the Medici in Florence. Not open to students who have earned credit for HART 3320 or 3320W without permission. Total credit for this course and HART 3320 or 3320W will not exceed 4 credit hours. Credit hours reduced from second course taken (or from test or transfer credit) as appropriate. [3] (HCA)

HART2320W - The Italian Renaissance WorkshopDevelopment of artists' shops, 14th into 16th century. Organization and production. Painting and sculpture techniques. Role of artists in society. Fra'Angelico, Andrea del Verrocchio and the young Leonardo da Vinci, and Sandro Botticelli. Firsthand study of works in the Kress Collection at Vanderbilt. Offered on a graded basis only.Not open to students who have earned credit for HART 3320W without permission. Total credit for this course and 3320W will not exceed 3 hours. Credit hours reduced from second course taken (or from test or transfer credit) as appropriate. [3] (HCA)

HART2325 - Great Masters of the Italian RenaissanceFrom the late Gothic to the High Renaissance. Landmarks in painting, sculpture, and architecture in central Italy. Trecento Sienese masters; Giotto, Donatello, Botticelli, and Leonardo in Florence; and Michelangelo and Raffaello in Rome. Tempera and fresco technique; civic, ecclesiastic, and domestic buildings; and stylistic progression. [3] (INT)

HART2330 - Italian Renaissance Art after 1500High Renaissance and Mannerist art in sixteenth-century Italy, considering Florentine masters such as Leonardo, Michelangelo, and Pontormo, the Roman school of Raphael, and the Venetians from Giorgione and Titian to Tintoretto. [3] (HCA)

HART2340W - The Art of VeniceRenaissance art in Venice and the Veneto during the 15th and 16th centuries. The Golden Age. Painters Bellini, Mantegna, Giorgione, Titian, Tintoretto; architecture of Palladio. Stylistic progression and the development of oil painting. The altarpiece, religious and mythological narrative, and role of portraiture. Context and meaning, civic, state, and ecclesiastical patronage, and consideration of audience. Offered on a graded basis only. [3]

HART2342W - Venice: Between Land and Sea, Late Antiquity to PresentVenetian history and visual and material culture from environmental and geographical perspectives. Late antiquity to present with emphasis on the early modern period. Art and architectural history, urbanism, cultural geography, environmental history. Engineering and water management; trade and colonialism; tourism and climate change. Offered on a graded basis only. [3] (SBS)

HART2360 - Northern Renaissance ArtPainting, sculpture, and graphic arts in the Low Countries, France, and Germany from the end of the fourteenth century through the Reformation. Historical, social, religious, and stylistic factors. Not open to students who have earned credit for HART 2362 or 3366 without permission. Total credit for this course and HART 2362 will not exceed 4 credit hours. Total credit for this course and HART 3366 will not exceed 5 credit hours. Credit hours reduced from second course taken (or from test or transfer credit) as appropriate. [3] (HCA)

HART2362 - Fifteenth-Century Northern European ArtPainting, sculpture, prints, and court art in the Low Countries, France, and Germany. Historical, social, economic, religious, and technical analysis. Jan van Eyck, Rogier van der Weyden, and Hieronymus Bosch. Not open to students who have earned credit for HART 2360 without permission. Total credit for this course and 2360 will not exceed 4 hours. Credit hours reduced from second course taken (or from test or transfer credit) as appropriate. [3] (HCA)

HART2390 - Seventeenth-Century ArtEuropean painting, sculpture, architecture, and graphic arts. Caravaggio, Bernini, Velazquez, Rubens, and Rembrandt. [3] (HCA)

HART2600 - Eighteenth-Century ArtThe history of European painting, sculpture, and printmaking from the Late Baroque era to the rise of Neoclassicism (1675-1775). Geographical focus on Italy and France. Artists include Maratti, Rusconi, Carriera, Tiepolo, Watteau, Chardin, Fragonard, and others. [3] (HCA)

HART2620 - Nineteenth-Century European ArtFrench Revolution to the early twentieth century. International context for artistic movements. The rise of abstraction and the relationship between art, politics, and social change. [3] (INT)

HART2622 - Neoclassicism and RomanticismA survey of major artists and monuments of visual culture considered in their political, social, economic, spiritual, and aesthetic contexts from 1760 to 1840. [3] (HCA)

HART2625 - French Art in the Age of ImpressionismFrench painting, sculpture, and drawing in its social, political, aesthetic, academic, and spiritual context from 1848 to 1886. The Social Realism of Daumier and Courbet; Manet and Aesthetic Realism; Monet, Renoir, Pissarro, Degas, Morisot, and Impressionism; and the rise of Neo- and Post-Impressionism with Seurat and van Gogh. [3] (INT)

HART2650 - Nineteenth-Century Architecture: Theory and PracticeEuropean and North American architecture from the French Revolution to the First World War. The relationships among architecture and technology, political regimes, social formations, and conceptions of history.Neoclassicism, Gothic Revival, Second Empire, the Arts-and-Crafts Movement, and Commercial Architecture. [3]

HART2660 - American Art to 1865Painting and sculpture of the United States from Colonial times to 1865 with an emphasis on iconography, social history, race, and gender. [3] (US)

HART2662 - Art and the Environment in the United StatesEnvironmental concerns as conveyed through the visual arts, 1800 to present. Nature and the formation of national identity and empire; landscape painting, materials and ecology; land art and environment as medium; photography and the visualization of disaster. [3] (US)

HART2665 - The Vanderbilts as Patrons: Taste-Makers of Gilded-Age Art and ArchitectureThe Vanderbilts' roles as patrons and taste-makers in translation of European architectural and artistic styles to the United States. Famed Vanderbilt estates such as Biltmore in Asheville, NC and the Breakers in Newport, RI.[3] (HCA)

HART2680 - British Art: Tudor to VictorianArt and visual culture in the British Isles from the reign of Henry VIII in the sixteenth century to Queen Victoria and the rise of the pre-Raphaelites in the nineteenth century. Portraiture and landscape painting, relationship between art and empire, rise of the Royal Academy, and patterns of patronage. Holbein, Hogarth, Gainsborough, Reynolds, Lawrence, and Turner. [3] (HCA)

HART2708 - Twentieth-Century British ArtPainting, sculpture, installation, film and video, and performance in the context of national culture and political history. [3] (HCA)

HART2710 - Twentieth-Century European ArtPainting, sculpture, and architecture; stressing a social-historical approach to the study of style. [3] (HCA) HART2720 - Modern Architecture

Painting, sculpture, and architecture; stressing a social-historical approach to the study of style. [3] (HCA) HART2720 - Modern ArchitectureA survey of nineteenth-century styles from Federal to Victorian, and major twentieth-century architects and designers from Wright and the Bauhaus to Eames and Kahn. City planning and preservation. [3] (HCA)

HART2722 - Modern Art and Architecture in ParisImmersive study of major monuments and museums in central Paris, art capital of the Western world during the 19th-20th centuries. Paintings of Monet, Braque, and Magritte; architecture of Guimard and Nouvel. Visits to Musée d'Orsay, Centre Pompidou, Parc de la Villette, Musée Rodin, Villa Savoye. Offered on a graded basis only.[3] (HCA)

HART2740 - Modern DesignFrom 1850 to present. How thinkers shaped practice. Relationships among modernity, modernism, and design.Historical debates over utopia, gender, social reform, inequality, and aura. Role in world's fairs, empire, fashion, international politics, domesticity. Close study of design exhibitions. [3] (HCA)

HART2750 - African American ArtColonial Era to the present. Artwork and artists in their political, cultural, social, historical, and aesthetic contexts. Relationship between race and representation. Not open to students who have earned credit for HART1750W without permission. Total credit for this course and HART 1750W will not exceed 3 hours. Credit hours reduced from second course taken (or from test or transfer credit) as appropriate. [3] (P)

HART2755 - Women in Art since 1850Painting, sculpture, photography, and performance by European and American women artists. Intersections of gender, race, and sexuality in visual production. Feminist methods in art history. [3] (P)

HART2760 - Early American Modernism, 1865-1945Painting and sculpture of the United States between the Civil War and the Second World War with emphasis on iconography, social history, class, and gender. [3] (US)

HART2765 - Art since 1945A survey of art produced in the United States and Europe since 1945 with an emphasis upon theory and the social and intellectual factors. [3] (US)

HART2772 - Contemporary Art and Biennial ExhibitionsFrom 1850 to present. Origins of world fairs, the Crystal Palace, Venice Biennale, and modern exhibitions. Core themes: Globalization of art, decolonized thinking and art making, the relation between locality and globality, and the commercialization of contemporary art. Offered on a graded basis only. [3] (P)

HART2775 - History of PrintsWoodcut, engraving, etching, and lithography from the fifteenth to the twentieth century. Scientific, devotional, ornamental, and documentary functions. D√ºrer, Piranesi, Hogarth, Daumier, and Kollwitz. Advances in technique and marketing, relationship to fine art, and place in popular culture. [3] (HCA)

HART2780 - History of Western UrbanismUrban form and planning from antiquity to the present. The integration of architecture and landscape.Diachronic surveys. Case studies, including Nashville. [3] (P)

HART2782 - Storied Places: History of Landscape DesignLandscape architecture as art form in Europe, Western Asia, and North America, from antiquity to the present.Stewardship and manipulation of land and water. Design of gardens and green spaces. Social and political meanings and messages. [3] (HCA)

HART2805 - Introduction to Museum StudiesFundamentals of museum history; diversity, theory, current practices, and ethics related to collecting and collection management, interpretation, and display. Global perspectivewith emphasis on Euro-American museums. Museums of Art, Anthropology, History, and Science. Includes site visits to local museums. [3] (P) HART2810W - Museum Exhibition

Fundamentals of museum history; diversity, theory, current practices, and ethics related to collecting and collection management, interpretation, and display. Global perspectivewith emphasis on Euro-American museums. Museums of Art, Anthropology, History, and Science. Includes site visits to local museums. [3] (P) HART2810W - Museum ExhibitionCulture of museums and exhibition. Object handling, storage, and display. Ethics of exhibition including of objects from various cultures. Contextual presentation of art. May be repeated for credit once if there is no duplication in topic and not twice from the same instructor. Offered on a graded basis only. (Maximum of 6credits total for all semesters of 2810W, 3810, and 3810W). [3] (P)

HART2815 - Digital Heritage: Methods and PracticeCase-based introduction to digital applications in history of art and archaeology. Theory, research design, current methods of photogrammetry, 2D and 3D modeling, and immersive environments. Mapping and spatial analysis. Data management and digital publishing. May be repeated for credit with permission of the faculty. [3]

HART2820 - Architectural Heritage: Research and DocumentationCase-based. Immersive and collaborative analysis of buildings of architectural and historical importance. On-site survey, exploration, and archival investigation; consideration of design, function, renovation, and historic preservation. Offered on a graded basis only. May be repeated for credit with no duplication in content. [3] (US) HART3112 - The Arts of China during the Liao-Song Period

Case-based. Immersive and collaborative analysis of buildings of architectural and historical importance. On-site survey, exploration, and archival investigation; consideration of design, function, renovation, and historic preservation. Offered on a graded basis only. May be repeated for credit with no duplication in content. [3] (US) HART3112 - The Arts of China during the Liao-Song PeriodArt and architecture of China during the Liao-Song period from C.E. 907 to C.E. 1279. Political, religious, and aesthetic contexts. Influence of coastal trade and pilgrimage in transformations of painting, sculpture, ceramics, and architecture. [3] (INT)

HART3140 - Healing and Art in East AsiaInfluence of early healing practices on the development of the arts of East Asia. Magical healing texts, talismans, and tattoos; diagramming the body and the landscape; and the art of the Buddha of Medicine.Gardens and growing transformative herbs. Tea as medicine and art. Serves as repeat credit for HONS 1820WSection 28. [3] (HCA)

HART3164W - Art of Buddhist Relic and ReliquaryFrom second century BCE to present. Relic veneration and construction of reliquaries from a visual perspective.Beautification, ritualization, use and abuse, and bodily issues spanning India, China, Korea, Japan, and Southeast Asia. [3] (INT)

HART3172 - Himalayan Art: Art of the Divine AbodeArt of Nepal and Tibet from its inception to the present. Religious and cultural contexts. Initial western responses; Hindu and Buddhist art and architecture in Nepal; Tibetan Buddhist Art; artistic productions in the Tibetan diaspora; and souvenir art in Nepal. [3] (INT)

HART3173W - Art and Empire in IndiaArt of India between the Mughal and British empires. Rise of colonialism and nationalism; cross-cultural encounters; and emergence of new institutions and technology. Offered on a graded basis only. [3] (P) HART3174 - The South Asian Temple

Art of India between the Mughal and British empires. Rise of colonialism and nationalism; cross-cultural encounters; and emergence of new institutions and technology. Offered on a graded basis only. [3] (P) HART3174 - The South Asian TempleFrom its inception to the present. Morphological and stylistic analysis. Anthropological and ethnographical approach to temples as living communal entities. [3] (INT)

HART3224 - Greek SculptureStyle, materials, and techniques ca. 900-31 B.C. Sculptors' craft and their reasons for the creation of both free-standing and architectural sculpture. [3] (HCA)

HART3226 - Greek Vases and SocietyAncient Greek vases as social documents. Interdisciplinary approaches, including historiographic, stylistic, semiotic, contextual, and scientific. Production, trade, and the functions of vases in funerary and ritual contexts, particularly the symposium. The development of black- and red-figure vase painting and iconography. [3] (HCA) HART3228W - Gender and Sexuality in Greek Art

Ancient Greek vases as social documents. Interdisciplinary approaches, including historiographic, stylistic, semiotic, contextual, and scientific. Production, trade, and the functions of vases in funerary and ritual contexts, particularly the symposium. The development of black- and red-figure vase painting and iconography. [3] (HCA) HART3228W - Gender and Sexuality in Greek ArtIconography of vase-painting and sculpture, from the Archaic through the Hellenistic periods. Visual constructions of bodies, poses, gestures, and dress, reflecting cultural attitudes towards courtship, marriage, rape, prostitution, and homosexuality. Emphasis on methodological approaches and comparisons with modern societies. Offered on a graded basis only. [3] (HCA)

HART3233 - Climate and Society: Drowning CitiesClimate change, sea-level fluctuations, and floods from antiquity to the present. Science of climate, coasts, and rivers. Interdisciplinary analysis of urban form and history. Physical, social, technological, and aesthetic influences. Past, present, and future cities in Near East, Europe, Asia, and North America, including Nashville, New Orleans, and New York. Not open to students who completed 3333 or EES 3333 offered fall 2020. [3] (P) HART3240W - Ancient Landscapes

Climate change, sea-level fluctuations, and floods from antiquity to the present. Science of climate, coasts, and rivers. Interdisciplinary analysis of urban form and history. Physical, social, technological, and aesthetic influences. Past, present, and future cities in Near East, Europe, Asia, and North America, including Nashville, New Orleans, and New York. Not open to students who completed 3333 or EES 3333 offered fall 2020. [3] (P) HART3240W - Ancient LandscapesGreco-Roman attitudes toward nature. Exploitation and stewardship of resources. Country-house and garden design. Representations of mythological and sacred landscapes in painting and poetry. [3] (HCA)

HART3256W - Roman Architecture and PowerPrestige building projects and architectural expressions of social, political, religious, and technological power in Rome and across its Empire. Public and private architecture; state institutions, infrastructure, and city dwellers; Romanization and resistance. Late antique transformations, modern legacies. [3] (HCA)

HART3272 - Portraits in Late AntiquitySocial, political, and religious functions of portraits from the first century through the sixth century CE. Issues of representation, including the construction of identity, social status, mediation of presence through image, and what constitutes a likeness. Portraits as memorials, as objects of veneration, and idealized models. Influences on later portraiture. [3] (HCA)

HART3274 - Art and Empire from Constantine to JustinianAn interdisciplinary study of Roman social, political, religious, and art historical developments in the fourth through sixth centuries CE. [3] (HCA)

HART3320 - Early Renaissance FlorencePainting and sculpture in fifteenth-century Florence. Ghiberti, Donatello, Masaccio, Fra Angelico, and Botticelli.Stylistic progression; iconographic interpretation and meaning; the role of patronage and audience; and original physical and cultural context. The Italian Renaissance workshop. Not open to students who have earned credit for HART 2310 without permission. Total credit for this course and 2310 will not exceed 4 hours. Credit hours reduced from second course taken (or from test or transfer credit) as appropriate. Serves as repeat credit for HART 3320W. [3] (HCA)

HART3320W - Early Renaissance FlorencePainting and sculpture in fifteenth-century Florence. Ghiberti, Donatello, Masaccio, Fra Angelico, and Botticelli.Stylistic progression, iconographic interpretation and meaning, the role of patronage and audience, original physical and cultural context, and the Italian Renaissance workshop. Offered on a graded basis only. Not open to students who have earned credit for HART 2310 without permission. Total credit for this course and HART 2310will not exceed 4 hours. Credit hours reduced from second course taken (or from test or transfer credit) as appropriate. Serves as repeat credit for HART 3320. [3] (HCA)

HART3332 - Raphael and the RenaissanceArt in Central Italy, ca. 1400-1520, with a focus on Rafaello Sanzio. His origin and artistic formation in Urbino and Perugia, early commissions in Florence, mature works and legacy in Rome. Predecessors Masaccio,Donatello, Piero della Francesca, and Pietro Perugino. Contemporaries Leonardo and Michelangelo. Taught on location in Italy. [3] (INT)

HART3334 - Michelangelo's Life and WorksSculpture, painting, architecture, and graphic works. Poetry and letters. Cultural, historical, religious, and political climate of his day. Influence upon artists. Critical reception. Repeat credit for students who have completed 3334W. [3] (HCA)

HART3334W - Michelangelo's Life and WorksSculpture, painting, architecture, and graphic works. Poetry and letters. Cultural, historical, religious, and political climate of his day. Influence upon artists. Critical reception. Repeat credit for students who have completed 3334. [3] (HCA)

HART3364W - The Court of BurgundyThe visual arts of the Dukes of Burgundy (1363-1477) in cultural context. Portraiture, chivalry, costume, storytelling, and ceremony. Artists include Claus Sluter, Jan van Eyck, and Rogier van der Weyden. [3] (HCA) HART3605W - French Art in the Age of Louis XV: From Rococo to Neoclassicism

The visual arts of the Dukes of Burgundy (1363-1477) in cultural context. Portraiture, chivalry, costume, storytelling, and ceremony. Artists include Claus Sluter, Jan van Eyck, and Rogier van der Weyden. [3] (HCA) HART3605W - French Art in the Age of Louis XV: From Rococo to NeoclassicismCourt art and visual culture 1715 to 1775. Aesthetic development in painting, sculpture, interior design, and architecture. Watteau, Boucher, Fragonard, Falconet, Boffrand. Chinoiserie and exoticisms, porcelain industry at S√®vres, and domestication of royal spaces at Versailles. Women patrons such as Mme de Pompadour and Mme du Barry. Offered on a graded basis only. [3] (INT)

HART3610W - Art and Politics in Revolutionary and Napoleonic Europe, 1785-1830Art patronage, politics, and propaganda of the ancien r√©gime, French Revolution, reign of NapoleonBonaparte, and Bourbon Restoration. French art policies on national patrimony, looting, and the confiscation of artworks; cultural centralization at the Mus√©e du Louvre. Painting, sculpture, printmaking, and decorative arts.David, Ingres, G√©rard, Canova, G√©ricault. Offered on a graded basis only. Not open to students who have completed HART 4960-01 offered spring 2019. [3] (HCA)

HART3712W - Surrealism20th- and 21st-century painting, sculpture, film, photography, and computer-generated and internet-based new media. Origins in France to international proliferation. Salvador Dal√≠, Ren√© Magritte, Luis Bu√±uel, Meret Oppenheim, and Frida Kahlo. Stylistic, thematic, and ideological issues in their historical and cultural context.[3] (HCA)

HART3718W - Twentieth-Century Mexican Art: Painting, Cinema, LiteratureFrom muralism to performance art. Relationship between artistic style and historical context. Analysis of ideological content. Rivera, Orozco, Kahlo, Modotti, Paz. Offered on a graded basis only. [3] (HCA)

HART3725W - The Skyscraper: Modern Urban IconDevelopment of the architectural type from the late 19th to the mid-20th century, seen from stylistic, technological, urban, artistic, and economic perspectives. [3] (HCA)

HART3730 - Twentieth-Century SculptureDefinitions, materials, movements, theories, and related practices, including architecture. [3] (HCA) HART3735 - History of Photography

Definitions, materials, movements, theories, and related practices, including architecture. [3] (HCA) HART3735 - History of PhotographyUses and meanings of photography from its invention (c. 1839) to the present. Ways of thinking about the medium and its status as a separate discipline in relation to the history of art. [3] (HCA)

HART3740 - History of Sound ArtFrom twentieth century to present. Use of sound as artistic medium. Experimental practices; the relationship of art and technology; sound art's position between music, performance and installation art. Cage, Cardiff, Paik, Rosenfeld, and Trimpin. [3] (HCA)

HART3753W - Imaging the "Other" in ArtHART3757W - Women in ArchitectureCourse DescriptionWomen's contributions to the built environment as architects, patrons, critics, and social reformers, primarily in the 19th and 20th centuries. Perspectives of feminism, gender, race, and sexuality studies. Julia Morgan, Eileen Gray, Charlotte Perriand, Denise Scott Brown, and Zaha Hadid. [3] (P)

HART3757W - Women in ArchitectureWomen's contributions to the built environment as architects, patrons, critics, and social reformers, primarily in the 19th and 20th centuries. Perspectives of feminism, gender, race, and sexuality studies. Julia Morgan, Eileen Gray, Charlotte Perriand, Denise Scott Brown, and Zaha Hadid. [3] (P)

HART3765W - Monuments and Memorials, 1900 to presentGlobal memorialization practices in Europe, North America, and post-colonial settings. Memorials to Holocaust, civil rights movements, acts of terrorism. Monuments in and of multiple wars. Themes include counter-monuments, history and memory, and preservation. Offered on a graded basis only. [3] (HCA)

HART3766W - Post-1871 Berlin Monuments, Memorials, and City PlanningBerlin's city planning; monuments and memorials from the beginning of the German Empire. Political, social, and cultural history, including World War II, the Holocaust, and the Cold War. Brandenburg Gate, Berlin Palace, Reichstag, Holocaust Memorial, Jewish Museum, and Berlin Wall. [3] (P)

HART3767W - Neo-Dada and Pop ArtArtistic movements at the end of modernism and beginning of postmodernism, 1955-1980. Intersection with music, consumer culture, advertising, and economics. Jackson Pollock, Robert Rauschenberg, Jasper Johns, Andy Warhol, and Roy Lichtenstein. Issues of gender and sexuality through construction of femininity and masculinity.[3] (US)

HART3790 - Monumental Landscapes of ProvenceFirst millennium BCE to the present. Architecture and art, physical geography and natural resources in Mediterranean France. Greek-Gallic interactions, Roman urbanism, medieval institutions, and modern painting and design. Based in Aix-en-Provence and Marseille. [3] [HCA]

HART3810 - Exhibiting Historical ArtResearch and exhibition of art in the permanent collection of the Vanderbilt University Fine Arts Gallery.Research methods and principles of object organization and display, illustrated via selected objects that vary annually. May be repeated for credit once if there is no duplication in topic and not twice from the same instructor. Offered on a graded basis only. (Maximum of 6 credits total for all semesters of 3810 and 3810W).[3] (HCA)

HART3810W - Exhibiting Historical ArtResearch and exhibition of art in the permanent collection of the Vanderbilt University Fine Arts Gallery.Research methods and principles of object organization and display, illustrated via selected objects that vary annually. May be repeated for credit once if there is no duplication in topic and not twice from the same instructor. Offered on a graded basis only. (Maximum of 6 credits total for all semesters of 3810 and 3810W).[3] (HCA)

HART3825W - Meaning and Form in ArchitectureHuman-made environment in various cultural contexts; historical and theoretical perspectives. Diverse approaches and methodologies for addressing formalism in architecture and the visual arts. [3] (P)

HART3840 - Directed StudyRegistration only with agreement of instructor involved and with written approval of the director of undergraduate studies. May be repeated for a total of 6 credits, but students may earn only up to 3 credits per semester of enrollment. [1-3; maximum of 6 credits total for all semesters of HART 3840] (No AXLE credit) HART3850 - Independent Research

Registration only with agreement of instructor involved and with written approval of the director of undergraduate studies. May be repeated for a total of 6 credits, but students may earn only up to 3 credits per semester of enrollment. [1-3; maximum of 6 credits total for all semesters of HART 3840] (No AXLE credit) HART3850 - Independent ResearchSupervised work in extension of regular offerings in the curriculum. Registration only with agreement of instructor involved and with written approval of the director of undergraduate studies. May be repeated for a total of 6 credits, but students may earn only up to 3 credits per semester of enrollment. [1-3] (No AXLE credit) HART3880 - Internship Training

Supervised work in extension of regular offerings in the curriculum. Registration only with agreement of instructor involved and with written approval of the director of undergraduate studies. May be repeated for a total of 6 credits, but students may earn only up to 3 credits per semester of enrollment. [1-3] (No AXLE credit) HART3880 - Internship TrainingStudents gain experience in a broad range of arts-related programs, at public or private institutions, including museums, and/or federal agencies. Students may take 1-3 hours in 3883, which includes background research, done concurrently with a one-semester internship program (3880), leading to submission of a research paper at the end of that semester. A 3.0 grade point average, approval of a specific plan by the department, and at least 6 hours of prior work in History of Art is required. Offered only on a pass/fail basis only and must be taken concurrently with 3883. Will not count as part of the minimum hours for the History of Art major or minor.Corequisite: 3883. [Variable credit: 1-9] (No AXLE credit).

HART3883 - Internship ResearchStudents gain experience in a broad range of arts-related programs, at public or private institutions, including museums, and/or federal agencies. Students may take 1-3 hours in 3883, which includes background research, done concurrently with a one-semester internship program (3880), leading to submission of a research paper at the end of that semester. A 3.0 grade point average, approval of a specific plan by the department, and at least 6 hours of prior work in History of Art is required. Readings and critiqued assignments under faculty supervision.Will not count as part of the minimum hours for the History of Art major or minor. Corequisite: 3880. [Variable credit: 1-3] (No AXLE credit).

HART3890 - Selected TopicsMay be repeated for credit twice if there is no duplication in topic. Students may enroll in more than one section of this course each semester. [3; maximum of 9 credits total for all semesters of HART 3890] (No AXLE credit) HART4960 - Advanced Seminar

May be repeated for credit twice if there is no duplication in topic. Students may enroll in more than one section of this course each semester. [3; maximum of 9 credits total for all semesters of HART 3890] (No AXLE credit) HART4960 - Advanced SeminarAn undergraduate seminar involving advanced In-depth reading, research, and writing in a particular area of art history. Limited to juniors and seniors with preference to majors. May be repeated for credit once if there is no duplication in topic and not twice from the same instructor. Students may enroll in more than one section of this course each semester. Offered on a graded basis only. [3; maximum of 6 credits total for all semesters of 295; maximum of 9 credits for HART Honors candidates] (HCA)

HART4998 - Honors ResearchResearch to be done in consultation with a member of the faculty in history of art. Open only to those beginning honors work in history of art. May be repeated for a total of 6 credits. [1-6; maximum of 6 credits total for all semesters of HART 4998] (No AXLE credit)

HART4999 - Honors ThesisOpen only to seniors in the departmental honors program. Students completing this course with distinction, including a thesis and final examination, will earn honors in history of art. Prerequisite: 4998. May be repeated for a total of 6 credits. [1-6; maximum of 6 credits total for all semesters of HART 4999] (No AXLE credit) Honors

HONS1810W - College Honors Seminar in the Humanities and Creative ArtsOffered on a graded basis only. May be repeated for credit more than once if there is no duplication in topic, but students may earn only up to 6 credits per semester of enrollment. [3] (HCA)

HONS1820W - College Perspectives Honors SeminarOffered on a graded basis only. May be repeated for credit more than once if there is no duplication in topic, but students may earn only up to 6 credits per semester of enrollment. [3] (P)

HONS1830W - College Honors Seminar in Behavioral and Social SciencesOffered on a graded basis only. May be repeated for credit more than once if there is no duplication in topic, but students may earn only up to 6 credits per semester of enrollment. [3] (SBS)

HONS1840W - College Honors Seminar in History and Culture of the United StatesOffered on a graded basis only. May be repeated for credit more than once if there is no duplication in topic, but students may earn only up to 6 credits per semester of enrollment. [3] (US)

HONS1850W - College Honors Seminar in Mathematics and Natural ScienceOffered on a graded basis only. May be repeated for credit more than once if there is no duplication in topic, but students may earn only up to 6 credits per semester of enrollment. [3] (MNS)

HONS1860W - College Honors Seminar in International CulturesOffered on a graded basis only. May be repeated for credit more than once if there is no duplication in topic, but students may earn only up to 6 credits per semester of enrollment. [3] (INT)

HOD1001 - Commons iSeminarCommons iSeminar, a 1-hour small seminar experience, open to first-year students. Students and faculty will collaboratively explore a specialized topic in depth in this university-wide seminar sponsored by The Ingram Commons. General Elective credit only. [1]

HOD1115 - First-Year SeminarSelected Topics for first-year students [3]

HOD1250 - Applied Human DevelopmentIntroduction to the processes of human development and how such development can be influenced. Emphasis is placed on social development and implications for solving personal and professional problems. The course focuses on late adolescent and young adult development. [3]

HOD1300 - Small Group BehaviorDesigned to improve the student's ability to analyze behavioral patterns in groups such as leadership, conflict, and decision making and group roles. The student is expected to improve his/her abilities by effective participation in the group as well as in written analyses. Problems for analysis are drawn from events in the group and from theoretical readings. [3]

HOD2100 - Understanding OrganizationsOrganizations are comprised of individuals with diverse interests functioning within rapidly changing, complex environments, often with limited resources. Accordingly, understanding organizations requires multiple perspectives and approaches to problem-solving. Students in the course will learn to apply organizational theories to specific challenges in order to generate potential solutions that promote organizational health. HOD2100 can substitute for BUS 1400 in the business minor. Serves as repeat credit for BUS 1400. [3]

HOD2260 - Economics of Human ResourcesAn introduction to economics, with heavy emphasis on microeconomics of the family, household, consumer, and business firm. Applications to the economics of government, poverty, discrimination, labor markets, the environment, education, and other human resource and human development topics will be included. The class will be primarily lecture format with some small group interactions and discussions. Prerequisite - Statistics Course: PSY-PC 2110, PSY 2100, ECON 1500, MATH 2810 or MATH 2820. [3]

HOD2400 - Talent Management and Organizational FitThe course provides a general overview of social, economic, and other environmental factors impacting the world of work and helps students in understanding how organizations are responding to this changinglandscape. The course also enables students to critically engage this context by developing competencies and skills which will be applicable in a diversity of settings. [3]

HOD2500 - Systematic InquiryThis course offers an introduction to social science research methods covering qualitative and quantitative approaches. Students will develop the ability to critically analyze research studies as well as collaborate with others to conduct studies of their own, reporting their results in a professional format. [3]

HOD2700 - Public PolicyAn exploration of the creation, interpretation, implementation, and evaluation of public policy in the United States. Main emphases include key analytical/theoretical perspectives necessary for understanding the policy making process (problem Identification, agenda setting, formulation, adoption, Implementation, and evaluation), and main factors that influence policy making at the national and state levels. Particular attention is paid to the development of student analytic and writing skills. [3]

HOD3200 - Introduction to Data ScienceProvides students with both theoretical and practical knowledge of data science, including accessing data, analyzing data, and presenting data analysis. Data access topics include web scraping, using application programming interfaces and database queries. Data analysis topics include linear regression, logistic regression, and basics of unsupervised machine learning. Data analysis will also cover cross validation. Data presentation topics include univariate and bivariate graphs, lattice graphing, mapping and interactive graphics.Emphasizes literate programming as basis for access, analysis and presentation. Prerequisite: Introductory Statistics or permission of instructor. [3]

HOD3250 - Causal InferenceThe purpose of this course is to prepare participants to design and carry out social science research estimating the effects of educational interventions, programs and policies that is sufficiently credible to influence decisions about these educational practices and for publication in scholarly, social science journals including education and public policy. A second purpose is to enable participants to fairly and rigorously evaluate the contributions and limitations of empirical social science manuscripts that address significant causal questions for education practice and policymaking. The course will develop your understanding of the theoretical constructs that underlie causal inference, contribute to your understanding of some aspects of descriptive social science, and aid you in the development of appropriate criteria for assessing the contributions of particular studies to social science research literature. Prerequisites: HODE 3205 (or equivalent), PSY-PC 2115 (or equivalent), and PSY-PC3735 (or equivalent) and permission of instructor. [3]

HOD3275 - Practical Meta-analysisThe topics covered in this seminar will include the major steps involved in conducting meta-analysis, with particular emphasis on the technical issues and statistical analyses distinctive to this form of research.Specifically, the course will focus on providing students with the skills needed to be intelligent consumers of systematic reviews and meta-analyses: conduct a systematic, replicable search of the literature used to identify studies eligible for a meta-analysis; create and analyze meta-analytic databases using appropriate statistical techniques; and prepare written reports of meta analytic findings. Prerequisites: PSY-PC 2110 and PSY-PC 3735[3]

HOD3300 - Judgment and Analytical ReasoningThis course presents the cognitive, emotional, and contextual factors that affect judgment and decision-making.Through real-world examples, students will learn to identify common errors in human reasoning and develop an understanding of a variety of analytic strategies to overcome them. The primary tool for conducting these analyses will be Microsoft Excel. (Developing proficiency in Excel for analysis and reporting findings is a secondary goal of this course.) Features and functions of Excel will be taught in the context of the course content and third-party validation of Excel skills will be obtained through Microsoft Certification at the Basic and Expert levels. Serves as repeat credit for HOD 3890-01 in Fall 2018 and for HOD 3890-02 in Spring 2019. [3]

HOD3850 - Independent Study in Human and Organizational DevelopmentIndividual programs of reading or the conduct of Research studies in human and organizational development.Consent of supervising faculty member required. May be repeated. [1-3]

HOD3860 - Directed ResearchConsent of supervising faculty member required. May be repeated. [1-3]

HOD3864 - Research ExperienceThis course provides undergraduate students in HOD direct experience in conducting research. The course is designed for students interested in going on to graduate school as well as students who want to gain experience in generating knowledge in an information economy. The course conducts a review of research methodologies and requires students to critically read and deconstruct published research studies. Data analysis skills are sharpened in the computer lab and put into practice on their own research. Students conduct severalindependent research projects during the semester. Prerequisite: HOD 2500 and a statistics class. [3]

HOD3870 - Practicum in Human and Organizational DevelopmentAn intensive practicum experience. Three contact hours per week required for each credit hour. [1-3]

HOD3890 - Special Topics in Human and Organizational DevelopmentExploration of special issues on topics related to human and organizational development. May be repeated for credit with change of topic. [1-3]

HOD4949 - Capstone DesignStudents partner with the HOD Capstone team and campus resources to explore, develop, and implement a successful capstone design process. The Capstone Design process requires students to engage in content, accomplish learning objectives, and meet deadlines. Students who successfully meet the learning objectives and demonstrate readiness will be confirmed for the HOD capstone semester. Corequisites or Prerequisites: HOD 1250, 1300, 2100, 2400, 2500, 2700 [0].

HOD4950 - Capstone PartnershipStudents complete an immersive learning experience with an organization, collecting field notes andobservations, conducting informational interviews and internal research, and completing workplace duties as assigned. Prerequisite: HOD 1250, 1300, 2100, 2400, 2500, 2700, and 4949. Corequisite: HOD 4951, 4952, 4953[3-6]

HOD4951 - Critical Reflexivity and Systems ThinkingStudents develop skills in critical reflection using a case study model to process and analyze workplace behavior using theories from earlier coursework. Students demonstrate engagement with capstone site stakeholders, visually diagram the different parts of the systems that interact internally and externally with the capstone site, and clearly define the relationships between the different parts of their capstone and the systems they impact.Prerequisite: HOD 1250, 1300, 2100, 2400, 2500, 2700. Corequisite: HOD 4950, 4952, 4953 [3]

HOD4952 - Mapping Future Personal and Professional DevelopmentStudents use research tools and personal development strategies to identify future goals and map next steps in their academic and professional journey. The course reflection is built upon retrospectives developed from each of the HOD core courses. Students use the material in their retrospectives and personal learning goal reflections to map their professional and personal future. Prerequisite: HOD 1250, 1300, 2100, 2400, 2500, 2700, and 4949. Corequisite: HOD 4950, 4951, 4953 [3]

HOD4953 - Analysis and ContributionStudents use methods from human centered design to analyze key factors impacting organization and develop a project-centered contribution to capstone site. Prerequisite: HOD 1250, 1300, 2100, 2400, 2500, 2700, and 4949. Corequisite: HOD 4950, 4951, 4952 [3]

HOD4978 - Senior ThesisSenior Thesis [3]

HOD4980 - Human and Organizational Development Honors SeminarOpen to students majoring in Human and Organizational Development who are admitted to the Honors Program.[3]

HOD4987 - Human and Organizational Development Honors SeminarOpen to students majoring in Human and Organizational Development who are admitted to the Honors Program.Course carries writing requirement credit for Peabody students. [3]

HUM1610 - Selected TopicsTopics Vary. May be repeated more than once if there is no duplication of topic. [3] (No AXLE credit) Humanities Education-PC

HMED2250 - Introduction to Arts EducationAcquaints the student with the philosophical and pedagogical base with which to develop competence in teaching the arts. [2]

HMED3850 - Independent Study in Humanities EducationSemi-independent study on selected topics in humanities education. May be repeated. Consent of faculty supervisor required. [1-3]

HMED3890 - Special Topics in Humanities EducationExplores special topics related to humanities education. May be repeated with change of topic. [1-3]

IMM2100 - Introduction to Law (Law Immersion I)This course provides students with a basic foundation in American law, the legal system, and legal authority to prepare them for law-related experiential and research experiences. [2]

IMM2200 - Introduction to Law II (Law Immersion II)This course provides students with a basic foundation in legal reasoning, research, and writing to prepare them to draft structured memoranda explaining law and policy. Open to sophomores and juniors who have completed IMM 2100 Introduction to Law I and are pursuing a Law Immersion plan. [2]

INDS1111 - First-Year Writing SeminarIndependent learning and inquiry in an environment in which students can express knowledge and defend opinions through intensive class discussion, oral presentations, and written expression. May be repeated for credit once if there is no duplication of topic, but students may earn only up to 3 credits in any 1111 course per semester of enrollment. [3; maximum of 6 credits total for all semesters of 1111] (AXLE credit category varies by section)

INDS3831 - Global Citizenship and ServiceThis course is offered by the Vanderbilt Initiative for Scholarship and Engagement (VISAGE). Graduate students may take this course for graduate credit. A service-learning course introducing students to themes and interpretations of global citizenship. Intended to be followed by 3832. [3] (INT)

INDS3832 - Global Community ServiceThis course is offered by the Vanderbilt Initiative for Scholarship and Engagement (VISAGE). Graduate students may take this course for graduate credit. Students will design and conduct research projects in collaboration with faculty mentors. Prerequisite: 3831. [1-3] (No AXLE credit)

INDS3833 - Seminar in Global Citizenship and ServiceThis course is offered by the Vanderbilt Initiative for Scholarship and Engagement (VISAGE). Graduate students may take this course for graduate credit. Project- and research-based seminar drawing on student experiences and learning in 3831 and 3832. Prerequisite: 3832. [3] (INT)

INDS3880 - Interdisciplinary InternshipInternship credit for work approved by the designated Associate Dean of Arts and Science. A written scholarly project must be produced in the internship. Must be taken P/F. Repeatable twice for a maximum of 3 credit hours in 3880 (and 3884) combined. [1] (No AXLE credit)

INDS3884 - Interdisciplinary InternshipInternship credit for summer work approved by the designated Associate Dean of Arts and Science. A written scholarly project must be produced in the internship. Course must be taken P/F. May be repeated for credit; maximum of 3 credit hours in 3881, 3882, 3883, and 3884 combined. [1] (No AXLE credit)

INDS3990 - Interdisciplinary internship TrainingUnder faculty supervision students from any discipline can gain experience in a variety of public and private settings. Students must be classified as a sophomore or higher and in good academic standing at the time the credit is earned. Must be taken on a Pass/Fail basis. Prerequisite or co-requisite: 3991 [1-3] (No AXLE credit) INDS3991 - Interdisciplinary Internship Readings and Research

Under faculty supervision students from any discipline can gain experience in a variety of public and private settings. Students must be classified as a sophomore or higher and in good academic standing at the time the credit is earned. Must be taken on a Pass/Fail basis. Prerequisite or co-requisite: 3991 [1-3] (No AXLE credit) INDS3991 - Interdisciplinary Internship Readings and ResearchUnder faculty supervision students from any discipline can gain experience in a variety of public and private settings. Students must be classified as a sophomore or higher and in good academic standing at the time the credit is earned. A thorough research paper or written report is required at the end of the semester. Must be taken on a graded basis only. [1-3] (No AXLE credit)

ITA1001 - Commons iSeminarTopics vary. General Elective credit only. [1] (No AXLE credit)

ITA1101 - Elementary ItalianIntroduction to reading, writing, and speaking through an exploration of Italian culture. For students who have studied little or no Italian. No credit for students who have earned credit for a more advanced Italian language course. [3] (No AXLE credit)

ITA1102 - Elementary ItalianStudy of the language through an exploration of Italian culture. No credit for students who have earned credit for a more advanced Italian language course. Prerequisite: 1101. [3] (INT)

ITA1103 - Intensive Elementary ItalianOne-semester intensive course for students who have some knowledge of Italian or of another romancelanguage. No credit for students who have earned credit for 1101, 1102, or a more advanced Italian language course. [3] (INT)

ITA1111 - First-Year Writing SeminarIndependent learning and inquiry in an environment in which students can express knowledge and defend opinions through intensive class discussion, oral presentations, and written expression. May be repeated for credit once if there is no duplication of topic, but students may earn only up to 3 credits in any 1111 course per semester of enrollment. [3; maximum of 6 credits total for all semesters of 1111] (AXLE credit category varies by section)

ITA2203 - Intermediate ItalianLife and art in the diverse regions of Italy through an integrated four-skills approach of reading, writing, listening and speaking. No credit for students who have earned credit for a more advanced Italian language course.Prerequisite: 1102 or 1103. [3] (INT)

ITA2501W - Grammar and CompositionSyntax, idiomatic expressions, and current usage. Prerequisite: 2203. [3] (INT)

ITA2614 - ConversationDevelopment of oral proficiency through analysis and discussion of films, magazine articles, and contemporary art and literature. Prerequisite: 2203. [3] (INT)

ITA2700 - Great Italian Works in English TranslationItalian literature and culture from the Middle Ages to modernity. Founding of the Italian language through the"three crowns" of fourteenth-century Tuscany: Dante, Petrarch, and Boccaccio. Italian Renaissance and its European-wide repercussions disseminating humanist and historicist traditions. Risorgimento and nationhood.Michelangelo, Leonardo, Ariosto, Tasso, Vico, Leopardi, Calvino, Morante, Pasolini. [3] (INT)

ITA3000 - Introduction to Italian LiteratureCritical reading of major works of Italian literature from the beginning to the present. Prerequisite: 2501W. [3]

ITA3041 - Italian CivilizationThe politics, intellectual, social, artistic, and economic history of Italy from 1300 to the present, with emphasis on major political and philosophical authors. Taught in English. [3] (INT)

ITA3100 - Literature from the Middle Ages to the RenaissanceThe ideas and forms of the Trecento, Quattrocento, and Cinquecento, as reflected in the philosophy, history, literature, and art history of these periods. Major writers and their influence on Western European literatures.Prerequisite: 2501W. [3] (HCA)

ITA3240 - Dante's Divine ComedyDante's language and philosophical tenets through the study of style, characters, and themes. Taught in English. [3] (HCA)

ITA3242 - Dante in Historical ContextDante's philosophical and critical works in their medieval historical context and his influence in building a modern Western civilization. Knowledge of Italian not required. [3] (HCA)

ITA3340 - Famous Women from Antiquity to RenaissanceTexts on famous women from Antiquity to the Renaissance in Latin, Italian, French, and English literature.Reception, contemporary criticism, and theory. Texts in English translation; taught in English. [3] (HCA) ITA3500 - Baroque, Illuminismo, and Romanticism in Italy

Reception, contemporary criticism, and theory. Texts in English translation; taught in English. [3] (HCA) ITA3500 - Baroque, Illuminismo, and Romanticism in ItalyLiterature of the seventeenth through nineteenth centuries, with particular reference to the influence of European literatures in Italy. Prerequisite: 2501W. [3] (HCA)

ITA3600 - Twentieth-Century Literature: Beauty and ChaosPoetry and prose in social and historical context. Prerequisite: 2501W. [3] (HCA)

ITA3601 - The City in Time and SpaceFunctions, forms, and representations of the Italian city in different historical periods. Analysis of space and identity in Italy. Concepts and tools from urban studies to narrative and visual representations of the city. [3]

ITA3640 - Classic Italian CinemaFrom the 1910s to the 1970s. Selected works from Neorealism to Art Film. Relationship between cinema and the other arts. Contrasting film styles, including abstraction and realism, and tradition and transgression.Knowledge of Italian is not required. [3] (INT)

ITA3641 - Contemporary Italian CinemaFrom the 1970s to the present. Postmodern forays into metafiction, parody, and political and social critique. The return to realism and New Regionalism in the twenty-first century. Knowledge of Italian is not required. [3] (HCA) ITA3642 - Italian Visual Culture

From the 1970s to the present. Postmodern forays into metafiction, parody, and political and social critique. The return to realism and New Regionalism in the twenty-first century. Knowledge of Italian is not required. [3] (HCA) ITA3642 - Italian Visual CultureParallels between Italian literature and the visual arts, including painting, cinema, and intermediality. Focus on the representation of the visual arts in literature, the representation of literature in the visual arts, and Italy as the cradle of Western visual culture. Prerequisite: 2203. [3] (HCA)

ITA3701 - City FictionsInterdisciplinary exploration of how Italian authors, directors, and artists aspire to change the way readers and viewers understand and experience urban realities. Social, cultural, geographical, and architectural aspects of Italian cities as depicted in fiction, travel literature, cinematic images, the visual arts, and music. Prerequisite: 2203. [3] (P)

ITA3702 - Topics in Contemporary Italian CivilizationShort stories, historical documents, and articles from the press. Prerequisite: 2501W. [3] (No AXLE credit) ITA3703 - Italy: A World Cultures & Languages

Short stories, historical documents, and articles from the press. Prerequisite: 2501W. [3] (No AXLE credit) ITA3703 - Italy: A World Cultures & LanguagesDiversity in Italian culture and language from earliest records to the present. Communicative aspects of contemporary Italian; improvement of phonetic skills and understanding of social, cultural, and linguistic aspects. Oral and written sources in standard and regional Italian, with a focus on mass media. Prerequisite: 2203. [3] (P)

ITA3704 - Made-in-Italy: Italianness in Italy and AbroadCultural, historical, and economic analysis of Italian brands and products in Italy and the USA, and the aspects that determine their quality or representative mark. Fashion brands, design products, architectural styles, and popular music from local and global perspectives. Italian and American artistic and cinematic representations of Made-in-Italy. Taught in English. [3] (INT)

ITA3740 - Imaginaries of Italian migration in USAThe history of Italian immigration in the United States. American representations of Italians and Italian-Americans from 1900 to the present. Cinematographic and literary images of Italians and Italian Americans.Historical and anthropological scholarship. Films, fiction, ethnic marketing, and travel writing. Knowledge of Italian is not required. [3] (US)

ITA3802 - Contemporary Italian Society and CultureCapitalism and modernization, immigration, and multiculturalism. Racism, youth culture, gender, sexuality, and feminism. Changing definitions of family. Regionalism, entertainment, and sport. Prerequisite: 2203. [3] (P) ITA3803 - Mediterranean Culture (taught in Sicily and Italy)

Capitalism and modernization, immigration, and multiculturalism. Racism, youth culture, gender, sexuality, and feminism. Changing definitions of family. Regionalism, entertainment, and sport. Prerequisite: 2203. [3] (P) ITA3803 - Mediterranean Culture (taught in Sicily and Italy)Culture and history of the Mediterranean. Taught in Sicily and the Italian peninsula. Knowledge of Italian is not required. [3] (HCA)

ITA3850 - Independent StudyA reading course, the content of which varies according to the needs of the individual student. Primarily designed to cover pertinent material not otherwise available in the regular curriculum. May be repeated for a total of 12 credits over a four-semester period, but students may earn only up to 3 credits per semester of enrollment. [1-3; maximum of 12 credits total for four semesters of ITA 3850] (No AXLE credit)

ITA3890 - Special Topics in Italian LiteratureMay be repeated for credit more than once if there is no duplication in topic. Students may enroll in more than one section of this course each semester. Prerequisite: 2501W. [3] (No AXLE credit)

JAPN1011 - Basic Japanese ISimple conversation, writing system, and reading. Designed exclusively for students with little or no previous exposure to Japanese. No credit for students who have earned credit for 1101 or a more advanced Japanese language course. [3] (No AXLE credit)

JAPN1012 - Basic Japanese IINo credit for students who have earned credit for 1101 or a more advanced Japanese language course.Prerequisite: 1011. [3] (No AXLE credit)

JAPN1013 - Practical Japanese ConversationConversational skills for everyday communication in actual Japanese cultural situations. Interpersonal and presentational speaking and listening proficiency. Prerequisite: 1012 or instructor permission. [2] (No Axle Credit)

JAPN1101 - Elementary Japanese IAcquisition of oral-aural skills and basic grammar. Introduction to reading and writing Japanese syllabaries and Chinese characters. Two hours of lecture and three hours of drill per week. No credit for students who have earned credit for 1012 or a more advanced Japanese language course. [5] (No AXLE credit)

JAPN1102 - Elementary Japanese IITwo hours of lecture and three hours of drill per week. No credit for students who have earned credit for a more advanced Japanese language course. Prerequisite: 1012 or 1101. [5] (INT)

JAPN1231 - Tadoku: Extensive Reading in JapaneseDevelop reading skills in Modern Japanese, using extensive reading method. May be repeated once; students may earn up to 2 hours credit. Prerequisite: 1011 or 1101. [1] (No AXLE credit)

JAPN2201 - Intermediate Japanese IDevelopment of conversational skills and linguistic competence. Syntax, writing, and reading. Two hours of lecture and three hours of drill per week. No credit for students who have earned credit for a more advanced Japanese language course. Prerequisite: 1102. [5] (INT)

JAPN2202 - Intermediate Japanese IITwo hours of lecture and three hours of drill per week. No credit for students who have earned credit for a more advanced Japanese language course. Prerequisite: 2201. [5] (INT)

JAPN2232 - Japanese through MangaReading and analysis of Japanese comic books. Language skills and knowledge of contemporary Japanese popular culture. Basic knowledge of hiragana and katakana required. [1] (No AXLE credit)

JAPN2233 - Language through Japanese Food CultureOral and written language proficiency through the history, culture, and social issues related to traditional and contemporary Japanese food. [1-3] (No AXLE credit; INT when offered for 3 credit hours)

JAPN3301 - Advanced Japanese IReading and writing in contemporary Japanese texts. Conversation, discussion, and development of pragmatic competence. No credit for students who have earned credit for a more advanced Japanese language course.Prerequisite: 2202. [3] (INT)

JAPN3302 - Advanced Japanese IINo credit for students who have earned credit for a more advanced Japanese language course. Prerequisite: 3301. [3] (INT)

JAPN3302W - Advanced Japanese IIReading and writing essays in Japanese. Sophisticated vocabulary and grammatical construction through discussion and composition. No credit for students who have earned credit for a more advanced Japanese language course. Repeat credit for students who have earned credit for 3302. Prerequisite: 3301. [3] (INT) JAPN3851 - Independent Study

Reading and writing essays in Japanese. Sophisticated vocabulary and grammatical construction through discussion and composition. No credit for students who have earned credit for a more advanced Japanese language course. Repeat credit for students who have earned credit for 3302. Prerequisite: 3301. [3] (INT) JAPN3851 - Independent StudyA reading course which may be repeated with variable content according to the needs of the individual student.Primarily designed to cover materials not otherwise available in the regular curriculum. May be repeated for a total of 12 credits in 3851 and 3852 combined if there is no duplication in topic, but students may earn only up to 3 credits per semester of enrollment. [1-3; maximum of 12 credits total for all semesters of JAPN 3851 and 3852] (No AXLE credit)

JAPN3852 - Independent StudyA reading course which may be repeated with variable content according to the needs of the individual student.Primarily designed to cover materials not otherwise available in the regular curriculum. May be repeated for a total of 12 credits in 3851 and 3852 combined if there is no duplication in topic, but students may earn only up to 3 credits per semester of enrollment. [1-3; maximum of 12 credits total for all semesters of JAPN 3851 and 3852] (No AXLE credit)

JAPN3891 - Special Topics in Advanced JapaneseReading, writing, and discussion in authentic Japanese cultural, literary, and historical texts. Topics vary. May be repeated for credit more than once if there is no duplication in topic. Students may enroll in more than one section of this course each semester. Prerequisite: 3302. [3] (INT)

JAPN4401 - Readings in Japanese LiteratureProficiency-oriented language approach. Interpretive, interpersonal, and presentational communication skills.Advanced vocabulary, kanji, grammar, and both casual and formal expressions in social situations and contexts.Offered on a graded basis only. Prerequisite: 3301. [3] (HCA)

JS1001 - Commons iSeminarTopics vary. General Elective credit only. [1] (No AXLE credit)

JS1002 - Introduction to Jewish StudiesIntroduction to Judaism and Jewish history through philosophical, political, social, psychological, and artistic perspectives. Biblical studies; and culture, philosophy, and literature. Antiquity and the medieval world; modern and contemporary experience. Repeat credit for students who have completed 1002W. [3] (INT)

JS1002W - Introduction to Jewish StudiesIntroduction to Judaism and Jewish history through philosophical, political, social, psychological, and artistic perspectives. Biblical studies; culture, philosophy, and literature. Antiquity and the medieval world; modern and contemporary experience. Repeat credit for students who have completed 1002. [3] (INT)

JS1010 - Judaism: An IntroductionJudaism from the ancient Near East to the present day. The Jewish life cycle. Varieties of Jewish practice throughout history. Interaction and dialogue with other religious communities, and the challenges posed by modernity in the wake of Jewish 'enlightenment' and political emancipation. [3] (INT)

JS1040 - Introduction to Modern Jewish HistoryMeaning and origins of modern Jewish history from 1492. The diverse experiences of Jewish communities across the globe. Men's and women's redefinition of Jewish identity as they confronted modernity. Rise of secular rights for Jews but also of new forms of persecution. No credit for students who have earned credit for JS 1240. [3] (P) JS1111 - First-Year Writing Seminar

Meaning and origins of modern Jewish history from 1492. The diverse experiences of Jewish communities across the globe. Men's and women's redefinition of Jewish identity as they confronted modernity. Rise of secular rights for Jews but also of new forms of persecution. No credit for students who have earned credit for JS 1240. [3] (P) JS1111 - First-Year Writing SeminarIndependent learning and inquiry in an environment in which students can express knowledge and defend opinions through intensive class discussion, oral presentations, and written expression. May be repeated for credit once if there is no duplication of topic, but students may earn only up to 3 credits in any 1111 course per semester of enrollment. [3; maximum of 6 credits total for all semesters of 1111] (AXLE credit category varies by section)

JS1200 - Classical Judaism: Jews in AntiquityHistory of the Jewish people from biblical origins through the 2nd century CE. The Hellenistic Age, the Age of the Maccabees, Roman rule, and the rise of the Rabbis and Rabbinic literature. [3] (HCA)

JS1210 - The Bible as Literature/The Bible and LiteratureHebrew Bible. Introduction to methods of reading; reception from antiquity to the present; and the Bible in literature. [3] (HCA)

JS1220 - Jews in the Medieval WorldJewish experience from the 2nd century CE to 1492. Legal status of Jews; economic and religious developments.Burning the Talmud, age of charters, reaction to the Crusades, Jewish expulsion from Spain. [3] (INT) JS2100 - The New Testament in Its Jewish Contexts

Burning the Talmud, age of charters, reaction to the Crusades, Jewish expulsion from Spain. [3] (INT) JS2100 - The New Testament in Its Jewish ContextsDocuments of the origin of Christianity and the social, literary, ideological, and theological contexts in which they emerged and which they reflect. Various critical methodologies employed in interpreting them. [3] (P) JS2150 - Issues in Rabbinic Literature

Documents of the origin of Christianity and the social, literary, ideological, and theological contexts in which they emerged and which they reflect. Various critical methodologies employed in interpreting them. [3] (P) JS2150 - Issues in Rabbinic LiteratureHistory of Rabbinic thought from its origins to the Middle Ages through the reading of central Rabbinic texts.Capital punishment, women in Rabbinic culture, sectarianism, and the power structures of Roman Palestine and Sasanian Babylonia. May be repeated for credit more than once if there is no duplication in topic, but students may earn only up to 6 credits per semester of enrollment. [3] (INT)

JS2210W - Hebrew Literature in TranslationOrigins and development in Eastern Europe from the nineteenth century to postmodern Israeli literature. The relationship between historical transformations and literary form. [3] (INT)

JS2215 - Modern Yiddish Literature in TranslationLate nineteenth to mid-twentieth century. Diaspora, minority writing, gender, from shtetl to city, and the Holocaust. [3] (INT)

JS2220 - Israeli Culture through FilmCinematic representations of modern Israeli culture. Historical, social, and political aspects. Constructions of national identity. Treatments of war and conflict, ethnicity, gender, and Zionism. [3] (INT)

JS2230W - American Southern Jews in Life and LiteratureFrom colonial times to the present. Interactions between Southern Jews and other Southerners, and between Southern and Northern Jews. The Civil War, Jewish economic activities, and the civil rights movement. [3] (US) JS2240W - Black-Jewish Relations in Post-War American Literature and Culture

From colonial times to the present. Interactions between Southern Jews and other Southerners, and between Southern and Northern Jews. The Civil War, Jewish economic activities, and the civil rights movement. [3] (US) JS2240W - Black-Jewish Relations in Post-War American Literature and CultureThe historical relationship between African Americans and Jewish Americans and its portrayal in novels, short stories, and films by artists from both communities. [3] (US)

JS2250W - Witnesses Who Were Not There: Literature of the Children of Holocaust SurvivorsFiction and non-fiction produced by children of Holocaust survivors. [3] (HCA)

JS2255 - Creative Writing With Jewish PerspectivesCreative writing course with readings as broad how-to guides. How Jewish and non-Jewish writers engage with or distance themselves from their their socio-ethnic/religious identity. Reading and writing in multiple genres including short stories, autobiography, poetry, plays, screenplays, and song lyrics. Exploration of different styles and techniques of writing, such as narrative voice and dialogue. [3] (HCA)

JS2260 - Coming of Age in Jewish Literature and FilmThe transition of young Jewish protagonists into adulthood as portrayed in literary works and films from Europe, Africa, and the Americas. Repeat credit for students who have completed 2260W. [3] (INT)

JS2260W - Coming of Age in Jewish Literature and FilmThe transition of young Jewish protagonists into adulthood as portrayed in literary works and films from Europe, Africa, and the Americas. Repeat credit for students who have completed 2260. [3] (INT)

JS2270 - Jewish StorytellingTwentieth-century short fiction and narrative traditions. The transition from religious to secular cultural forms.Immigration and ethnic literary forms. All works are in English or English translation from Yiddish, Hebrew, and Russian. Repeat credit for students who have completed 2270W. [3] (HCA)

JS2270W - Jewish StorytellingTwentieth-century short fiction and narrative traditions. The transition from religious to secular cultural forms.Immigration and ethnic literary forms. All works are in English or English translation from Yiddish, Hebrew, and Russian. Repeat credit for students who have completed 2270. [3] (HCA)

JS2280 - Jewish HumorThe flowering of Jewish humor, especially in the U.S. during the twentieth century. Vaudeville, radio comedy, and the Golden Age of television. The careers and works of influential comics, writers and filmmakers, and the development of stand-up comedy. The effect of Talmudic disputes, Yiddish wordplay, and the history of Diaspora life upon secular Jewish comedians, essayists, playwrights, and fiction writers. Repeat credit for students who have completed 2280W. [3] (US)

JS2280W - Jewish HumorThe flowering of Jewish humor, especially in the U.S. during the twentieth century. Vaudeville, radio comedy, and the Golden Age of television. The careers and works of influential comics, writers and filmmakers, and the development of stand-up comedy. The effect of Talmudic disputes, Yiddish wordplay, and the history of Diaspora life upon secular Jewish comedians, essayists, playwrights, and fiction writers. Repeat credit for students who have completed 2280. [3] (US)

JS2290W - Imagining the Alien: Jewish Science FictionScience fiction and speculative fiction by Jewish writers in cultural context. Aliens, robots, and secret identities; time travel; utopia and political critique; questions of Jewish identity. [3] (HCA)

JS2300 - Modern Jewish ThoughtJewish intellectual responses to major transformations of modernity. Impact of secularization, universalism, pluralism, nationalism, and gender theories on Jewish thought and identity. Conflicting perspectives of tradition, education, culture, and religion. Relationship between Israel and the diaspora. [3] (P)

JS2320 - Freud and Jewish IdentityAnalysis of rhetoric and themes in selected writings of Sigmund Freud and his times, development ofassimilation and of anti-Semitic repudiation. [3] (SBS)

JS2330 - Is G-d Guilty? The Problem of Evil in JudaismOrigin, nature, and representations of evil from Scripture through the Hasidic masters. Reflections of modern thinkers. [3] (HCA)

JS2340 - Jewish Philosophy after AuschwitzCritical responses to social and political institutions and the corresponding modes of thought that made Auschwitz possible and continue to sustain the barbarism that many leading philosophers have identified at the heart of culture. [3] (INT)

JS2400 - American Jewish LifeDiversity, individualism, and change in Jewish life. Food and culture, memory and identity, gender and assimilation, Reform-Conservative-Orthodox culture wars. [3] (SBS)

JS2420W - American Jewish SongwritersFrom the late 19th Century to the present. Vaudeville, Tin Pan Alley, the development of the stage musical, and the Brill Building. Folk, rock, pop, and country. Contributions of Jewish songwriters to American music. [3] (US) JS2440 - Jewish American Literature

From the late 19th Century to the present. Vaudeville, Tin Pan Alley, the development of the stage musical, and the Brill Building. Folk, rock, pop, and country. Contributions of Jewish songwriters to American music. [3] (US) JS2440 - Jewish American LiteratureNineteenth century to the present. Issues of race, gender, ethnicity, immigration, and diaspora. Offered on a graded basis only. [3] (HCA)

JS2450 - The Jewish DiasporaChanging Jewish communities, especially outside the United States and Israel, in macro-historical context. Post-communist European Jewish identity. New global diasporas and their relationship to the largest Jewish communities in Israel and the United States. [3] (INT)

JS2500 - Modern IsraelInternal dynamics, debates, and conflicts within Israeli society. Political, social, and cultural transformations from the 1980s to the present. [3] (INT)

JS2520 - Zionism: Politics, Religion, and EthnicityTensions among religion, nationalism, and political activism. Translations of Messianism into a secular program.Criticism from within and without the movement. [3] (HCA)

JS2530W - Modern Israeli CultureSocial and cultural history of modern Israel from the establishment of the State in 1948 to the present.Representations of national identity, collective belonging, and historical memory in public culture. Offered on a graded basis only. [3] (INT)

JS2540 - Power and Diplomacy in the Modern Middle EastHistory of the Middle East in the 19th and 20th centuries with an emphasis on U.S. involvement after 1945. U.S.relationship with Israel, and its impact on the region. [3] (INT)

JS2560 - Social Movements in Modern Jewish LifeHow social movements shape contemporary American Jewish culture and politics. Explores movements internal to Judaism and those bringing religion into the public sphere. [3] (SBS)

JS2600 - Muslims and JewsMuslim-Jewish relations from the birth of Islam to the 21st century. The Quran and the Jews. Jews in the Islamic world. Jewish cultures and Islamic cultures. Jewish exodus from the Islamic world. Muslims in Israel today. ISISand the Jews. Not open to students who have earned credit for JS 1111 section 11 without permission. Total credit hours for this course and JS 1111 section 11 will not exceed 3 credit hours. Credit hours reduced from most recent course taken (or from test or transfer credit) as appropriate. [3] (INT)

JS2620 - Jews in EgyptJewish life and experience under Egyptian, Greek, Roman, and Muslim rule in Egypt from the Ptolemies to 1956.Jewish self-government, economic life, and culture over twenty-two centuries, through letters, documents, and imaginative literature. [3] (INT)

JS2640 - Jews and GreeksFrom the seventh century BCE to ca. 1500 CE. Sites of interaction, languages, cultural ties, religious tensions, political conflicts, and competing philosophies. Works by Elephantine, Alexander the Great, the Maccabees, the Septuagint, Aristeas, Josephus, Philo, the rabbis, the New Testament, Ezekiel the Tragedian, Byzantium. [3] (INT) JS2640W - Jews and Greeks

From the seventh century BCE to ca. 1500 CE. Sites of interaction, languages, cultural ties, religious tensions, political conflicts, and competing philosophies. Works by Elephantine, Alexander the Great, the Maccabees, the Septuagint, Aristeas, Josephus, Philo, the rabbis, the New Testament, Ezekiel the Tragedian, Byzantium. [3] (INT) JS2640W - Jews and GreeksFrom the seventh century BCE to ca. 1500 CE. Sites of interaction, languages, cultural ties, religious tensions, political conflicts, and competing philosophies. Works by Elephantine, Alexander the Great, the Maccabees, the Septuagint, Aristeas, Josephus, Philo, the rabbis, the New Testament, Ezekiel the Tragedian, Byzantium. Serves as repeat credit for students who have earned credit for 2640. [3] (INT)

JS2700W - Judaism and MedicineMedicine, healing, health, and disease in Jewish text, history, ritual, literature, and lived experience. Jewish encounters with Jewish and gentile medical expertise, disability, aging, and death. Jewish approaches to problems in biomedical ethics. Intersection of health, Jewish identity, and sex and gender. [3] (P)

JS2710W - Jewish Sexual EthicsCritical readings of sex in Bible, Talmud, and Midrash in historical context. Analysis of ethical formation in representations of Jewish sexuality in modern western literature and film. Examination of and constructive response to present-day questions including queer rituals, sexual health, kink, and masturbation. [3] (HCA) JS2995 - Antisemitism: A History

Critical readings of sex in Bible, Talmud, and Midrash in historical context. Analysis of ethical formation in representations of Jewish sexuality in modern western literature and film. Examination of and constructive response to present-day questions including queer rituals, sexual health, kink, and masturbation. [3] (HCA) JS2995 - Antisemitism: A HistoryPre-history and history of modern anti-Jewish sentiments and actions from the Middle Ages to the present; focus on Europe and the United States. [3] (INT)

JS3000 - Major Themes in Jewish StudiesThe study of Jews, Judaism, and Jewish culture. History of Jewish Studies, core perspectives, key methodologies, critical debates. Classical literature, current trends. [3] (P)

JS3100 - The HolocaustThe history of the Holocaust: its origins, development, and its legacy in the context of Germany and European history. [3] (INT)

JS3210 - Reading Across Boundaries: Jewish and Non-Jewish TextsJS3333 - The BibleCourse DescriptionJewish and Islamic biblical traditions. [3] (P)

JS3333 - The BibleJewish and Islamic biblical traditions. [3] (P)

JS3400W - Jerusalemhistorical significance of the city through texts, music, maps, architecture, and archaeology. Current conflicts and proposals for their resolution. Holy Places and their political significance. Pilgrimage and Jerusalem Syndrome. Offered on a graded basis only. [3] (INT)

JS3730 - The Roman to Medieval Near East: Caesarea Excavations, IsraelFrom Herod the Great to the Mamluk conquest. Excavation of the site of Caesarea on the Mediterranean coast.Social, cultural, economic, and religious history. Maritime commerce; Roman rule; and the Christian, Jewish, and Muslim communities. Archaeological methods, geospatial analysis, and processing artifacts. Monumental architecture, urban topography, and littoral environment. Daily field and laboratory work with additional seminars and excursions. [3] (INT)

JS3830 - Contemporary Jewish IssuesProjects will vary according to the instructor. Service to community will be integral part of course. [3] (No AXLE

JS3840 - Directed ReadingsAdvanced readings and research on a selected topic done under the supervision of a faculty mentor. [3] (No AXLE credit)

JS3850 - Independent StudyA research project carried out under the supervision of a faculty mentor. May be repeated for a total of 6 credits if there is no duplication in topic, but students may earn only up to 3 credits per semester of enrollment. [1-3; maximum of 6 credits total for all semesters of JS 3850] (No AXLE credit)

JS3880 - Internship TrainingUnder faculty supervision, students gain experience in any of a variety of settings, such as community, municipal, or government agencies. A thorough report and research paper are required. Must be taken on a Pass/Fail basis only and must be taken concurrently with 3883. Corequisite: 3883. [Variable credit: 1-3] (No AXLE credit)

JS3883 - Internship ResearchUnder faculty supervision, students gain experience in any of a variety of settings, such as community, municipal, or government agencies. A thorough report and research paper are required. Students will write a research paper drawing on their experiences in 3880. Corequisite: 3880. [3] (No AXLE credit)

JS3890 - Special TopicsTopics as announced. May be repeated for credit more than once if there is no duplication in topic. Students may enroll in more than one section of this course each semester. [3] (No AXLE credit)

JS3892 - Topics in Ancient and Medieval Jewish HistoryFrom antiquity to 1492. Topics vary. May be repeated for credit more than once if there is no duplication in topic. Students may enroll in more than one section of this course each semester. [3] (No AXLE credit) JS3894 - Topics in Modern Jewish History

From antiquity to 1492. Topics vary. May be repeated for credit more than once if there is no duplication in topic. Students may enroll in more than one section of this course each semester. [3] (No AXLE credit) JS3894 - Topics in Modern Jewish HistoryFrom 1492 to the present. Topics vary. May be repeated for credit more than once if there is no duplication in topic. Students may enroll in more than one section of this course each semester. [3] (No AXLE credit) JS4301 - Jewish Language and Paleography

From 1492 to the present. Topics vary. May be repeated for credit more than once if there is no duplication in topic. Students may enroll in more than one section of this course each semester. [3] (No AXLE credit) JS4301 - Jewish Language and PaleographyAdvanced study in a language of the Jewish people with a particular focus on the linguistic and paleographic features that define its cultural context. Each section focuses on one of the following languages: Aramaic, Ladino, Judaeo-Arabic, Rabbinic Hebrew, or Yiddish. May be repeated for credit up to two times when the language studied differs. Consent of instructor required. [3] (INT)

JS4960 - Senior SeminarAdvanced reading and research in a particular area of Jewish studies. [3] (No AXLE credit)

JS4970 - Senior Project in Jewish StudiesReadings and independent research. Prerequisite: senior standing. [3] (No AXLE credit)

JS4980 - Senior Honors Research SeminarPresentation and discussion of progress being made on honors theses. Open only to senior departmental honors students. [3] (No AXLE credit)

JS4981 - Senior Honors Research SeminarPresentation and discussion of progress being made on honors theses. Open only to senior departmental honors students. [3] (No AXLE credit)

KICH1101 - Elementary K'iche' IKaqchikel, K'iche', or Q'eqchi'. Basic speaking, reading, and writing skills. Offered on a graded basis only. Serves as repeat credit for students who have earned credit for ANTH 2612. [3] (No AXLE credit)

KICH1102 - Elementary K'iche' IIIntermediate level course with advanced grammar. Counterfactual constructions, deixis, verbal derivations of positional roots, sound symbolic verbs, and verbal nominalizations. Vocabulary and idioms. Various literary genres. Serves as repeat credit for ANTH 2614. Offered on a graded basis only. Prerequisite: 1101 or ANTH2612. [3] (INT)

KICH2201 - Intermediate K'iche' IVocabulary, listening, and speaking skills. Modern and colonial texts. Cultural context of linguistic practices in K'iche' communities. Serves as repeat credit for ANTH 3614. Offered on a graded basis only. Prerequisite: 1102.[3] (INT)

KICH2202 - Intermediate K'iche' IITaught in K'iche'. Advanced vocabulary, grammar, syntax, reading, and writing. Colonial and modern texts.Serves as repeat credit for ANTH 3615. Offered on a graded basis only. Prerequisite: 2201 or ANTH 3614. [3]

MUKH1130 - Introductory Keyboard HarmonyIntroduction to repertoire, technique, transposition, harmonization, improvisation, and sight reading. Designed for B.Mus. and B.Mus.Arts students who have no piano background. Provides preparation for the Keyboard Harmony sequence. FALL. [1] Koutsoukos.

MUKH1131 - Keyboard Harmony IDevelopment of basic technique, reading proficiency, elementary transposition. Diatonic harmony at the keyboard. Prerequisite: placement exam or MUKH 1130. Not open to students who have completed MUKH 2133or 2134.MUKH1132 - Keyboard Harmony IICourse DescriptionDevelopment of basic technique, reading proficiency, elementary transposition. Diatonic harmony at the keyboard. Prerequisite: placement test or MUKH 1131. Not open to students who have completed MUKH 2133 or 2134. [1] Koutsoukos

MUKH1132 - Keyboard Harmony IIDevelopment of basic technique, reading proficiency, elementary transposition. Diatonic harmony at the keyboard. Prerequisite: placement test or MUKH 1131. Not open to students who have completed MUKH 2133 or 2134. [1] Koutsoukos

MUKH1133 - Keyboard Harmony IIIHarmonization of melodies, improvisation of small musical forms, transposition in all keys with cadences and modulations, four-part score reading. Prerequisite: MUKH 1132. Strongly recommended: C- or above in 1132.Not open to students who have completed MUKH 2133 or 2134. [1] Koutsoukos.

MUKH1134 - Keyboard Harmony IVHarmonization of melodies, improvisation of small musical forms, transposition in all keys with cadences and modulations, four-part score reading. Prerequisite: MUKH 1133. Strongly recommended: C- or above in 1133.Not open to students who have completed MUKH 2133 or 2134. [1] Koutsoukos.

MUKH2133 - Accelerated Keyboard Harmony IFunctional skills are reinforced with pedagogy, music theory, harmony, and ear training. Topics include improvisation, musical styles, and computer MIDI technology. For keyboard majors or by consent of instructor.Prerequisite: placement test. Not open to students who have completed MUKH 1131-1132 or 1133-1134. FALL.[2] Krieger.

MUKH2134 - Accelerated Keyboard Harmony IIIntensive study of materials presented in MUKH 2133. Prerequisite: 2133. Strongly recommended: C- or above in 2133. Not open to students who have completed 1133, 1134. SPRING. [2] Krieger.

KOR1101 - Elementary Korean IIntroduction to Korean language for students who have no previous knowledge of Korean. Basic skills in speaking, listening, reading, and writing, with a focus on oral proficiency. No credit for students who have earned credit for a more advanced Korean language course. [5] (No AXLE credit)

KOR1102 - Elementary Korean IIBasic skills in speaking, listening, reading, and writing, with a focus on oral proficiency. No credit for students who have earned credit for a more advanced Korean language course. Prerequisite: 1101 [5] (INT)

KOR2201 - Intermediate Korean ISpeaking, listening, reading, and writing, with intensive exercises for spelling, basic grammar, and vocabulary.Cultural aspects of daily life in Korea. No credit for students who have earned credit for a more advanced Korean language course. Prerequisite: 1102. [5] (INT)

KOR2202 - Intermediate Korean IISpeaking, listening, reading, and writing, with intensive exercises for spelling, basic grammar, and vocabulary.Cultural aspects of daily life in Korea. No credit for students who have earned credit for a more advanced Korean language course. Prerequisite: 2201. [5] (INT)

KOR3301 - Advanced Korean IEmphasis on formal speaking and writing. Introduction of four-character idioms and basic Chinese characters.No credit for students who have earned credit for a more advanced Korean language course. Prerequisite: KOR2202. [3] (INT)

KOR3302 - Advanced Korean IIEmphasis on formal speaking and writing. Introduction of four-character idioms and basic Chinese characters.No credit for students who have earned credit for a more advanced Korean language course. Prerequisite: 3301.[3] (INT)

KOR3851 - Independent Study[1-3] (No AXLE credit)

KOR3852 - Independent Study[1-3] (No AXLE credit)

KOR4401 - Readings in Modern Korean IAuthentic materials excerpted from cultural, literary, and business writings. Prerequisite: 3302. [3] (HCA) KOR4402 - Readings in Modern Korean II

Authentic materials excerpted from cultural, literary, and business writings. Prerequisite: 3302. [3] (HCA) KOR4402 - Readings in Modern Korean IIAuthentic materials excerpted from cultural, literary, and business writings. Prerequisite: 4401. [3] (HCA) Latin

LAT1101 - Beginning Latin IPractice in speaking and writing. No credit for students who have earned credit for a more advanced Latin language course. Graded basis only. [3] (No AXLE credit)

LAT1102 - Beginning Latin IITransition to literary Latin. Emphasis on comprehension of texts. No credit for students who have earned credit for a more advanced Latin language course. Graded basis only. Prerequisite: 1101. [3] (INT)

LAT1103 - Intensive Elementary LatinThe equivalent of Latin 1101 and 1102. This course presents the elements of the Latin language at an accelerated pace. Designed for students who have completed one or two years of Latin in high school but are not prepared to enter Latin 1102. No credit for students who have earned credit for 1101, 1102, or a more advanced Latin language course. [5] (INT)

LAT2201 - Intermediate Latin: ProseReview of Latin grammar and selected reading from major Latin authors. No credit for students who have earned credit for a more advanced Latin language course except 2202. [3] (INT)

LAT2202 - Intermediate Latin: PoetrySelected reading from the major Latin poets. No credit for students who have earned credit for a more advanced Latin language course. [3] (INT)

LAT3010 - The Writings of CaesarSelections from The Civil War and The Gallic War. Literary style and historical context. Prerequisite: 2202. [3]

LAT3020 - Cicero and the Humanistic TraditionStudy of Cicero's career and thought, and of his contribution to the development of the concept of humanitas.Readings from his letters, speeches, or philosophical works. Prerequisite: 2202. [3] (HCA)

LAT3030 - Latin LettersThe literary letters of Seneca and Pliny, with a brief introduction to the personal correspondence of Cicero and the letters discovered at Vindolanda. Prerequisite: 2202. [3] (HCA)

LAT3040 - The Roman HistoriansSelections from Sallust, Livy, and Tacitus, with attention to their objectives and methods; analysis of Roman historiography and its relation to Greek and early Christian historiography. Prerequisite: 2202. [3] (HCA) LAT3050 - Suetonius

Selections from Sallust, Livy, and Tacitus, with attention to their objectives and methods; analysis of Roman historiography and its relation to Greek and early Christian historiography. Prerequisite: 2202. [3] (HCA) LAT3050 - SuetoniusLAT3060 - TacitusCourse DescriptionSelections from the works of one of Rome's most important historians, read in the context of historiographical tradition and political and social background. Prerequisite: 2202. [3] (HCA)

LAT3060 - TacitusSelections from the works of one of Rome's most important historians, read in the context of historiographical tradition and political and social background. Prerequisite: 2202. [3] (HCA)

LAT3070 - SallustSelected works of one of Rome's most important historians, read in the context of historiographical tradition and political and social background. Prerequisite: LAT 2202. [3] (HCA)

LAT3100 - Roman ComedyReading of selected comedies of Plautus and Terence: study of the form of Roman comedy and its relation to the Greek New Comedy. Prerequisite: 2202. [3] (HCA)

LAT3110 - CatullusReading and interpretation of Catullus' poems; aesthetic, political, and rhetorical contexts; fundamentals of Latin meter. Prerequisite: 2202. [3] (HCA)

LAT3120 - Lucretius: De Rerum NaturaLucretius' poem studied both in the tradition of Epicurean philosophy and as a landmark in the development of the Latin didactic epic; background material in the fragments of Epicurus and some treatment of the Epicurean movement in Italy and especially in Rome. Prerequisite: 2202. [3] (HCA)

LAT3130 - Vergil: The AeneidAn intensive study of the entire poem, in the context of the epic tradition. Prerequisite: 2202. [3] (HCA) LAT3140 - The Lyric Poetry of Horace

An intensive study of the entire poem, in the context of the epic tradition. Prerequisite: 2202. [3] (HCA) LAT3140 - The Lyric Poetry of HoraceReading and interpretation of Horace's Epodes and Odes; relation to the Greco-Roman lyric tradition and to Augustan politics. Prerequisite: 2202. [3] (HCA)

LAT3150 - Latin ElegyAuthors who created a new type of love poetry during the rule of emperor Augustus: Tibullus, Propertius, Ovid, and Sulpicia. Construction and contestation of gender roles; political contexts; development of the elegiac couplet; modern responses. Prerequisite: 2202. [3] (HCA)

LAT3160 - OvidReading and interpretation of selections from the Metamorphoses or other works of Ovid. Prerequisite: 2202. [3]

LAT3170 - Roman SatireThe satires of Horace and Juvenal; the origins of Roman satire; history and conventions of the genre; background reading in other Roman satirists. Prerequisite: 2202. [3] (HCA)

LAT3180 - Neronian WritersSelections from authors in the literary renaissance during the reign of the artistic Emperor Nero, including Seneca, Lucan, Persius, and Petronius. Stylistic innovations, literary merits, and cultural contexts. Prerequisite: 2202. [3] (HCA)

LAT3200 - Early Christian WritersSelections from the writings of Latin Christians, from the account of Perpetua's martyrdom to the Confessions of Augustine. Prerequisite: 2202. [3] (HCA)

LAT3300 - Ancient Conspiracy - Theory and PracticeSelected works of two of Rome's most important historians, Livy and Sallust, and Cicero's speeches;Bacchanalian and Catilinarian conspiracies, read in the context of historiographical tradition and political and social background. Prerequisite: LAT 2202. [3] (HCA)

LAT3850 - Independent StudyDesigned for majors wanting to familiarize themselves with works or authors not covered in the regular curriculum. Prerequisite: 6 hours above 2202. May be repeated for a total of 6 credits if there is no duplication in topic, but students may earn only up to 3 credits per semester of enrollment. [1-3; maximum of 6 credits total for all semesters of LAT 3850] (No AXLE credit)

LAT3890 - Special Topics in Latin LiteratureMay be repeated for credit more than once if there is no duplication in topic. Students may enroll in more than one section of this course each semester. [3] (HCA)

LAT5101 - Beginning Latin IPractice in speaking and writing. No credit for students who have earned credit for a more advanced Latin language course. Graded basis only. [3]

LAS1001 - Commons iSeminarTopics vary. General Elective credit only. [1] (No AXLE credit.)

LAS1111 - First-Year Writing SeminarIndependent learning and inquiry in an environment in which students can express knowledge and defend opinions through intensive class discussion, oral presentations, and written expression. May be repeated for credit once if there is no duplication of topic, but students may earn only up to 3 credits in any 1111 course per semester of enrollment. [3; maximum of 6 credits total for all semesters of 1111] (AXLE credit category varies by section)

LAS2101 - Introduction to Latin AmericaA multidisciplinary survey of Latin America from pre-Columbian times to the present emphasizing culture, economic and political patterns, social issues, literature, and the arts in a historical perspective. [3] (INT) LAS2102 - Brazil: Past, Present, and Future

A multidisciplinary survey of Latin America from pre-Columbian times to the present emphasizing culture, economic and political patterns, social issues, literature, and the arts in a historical perspective. [3] (INT) LAS2102 - Brazil: Past, Present, and FutureA multidisciplinary survey of Brazil from pre-Columbian times to the present. Culture, economic and political patterns, social issues, literature, and the arts in historical perspective. [3] (INT)

LAS2301 - Music of Protest and Social Change in Latin AmericaPolitics of musical culture. Music both as a marker of sociopolitical change and as an agent of political transformation. [3] (INT)

LAS2601 - Latin America, Latinos, and the United StatesImmigration of Latin American and Caribbean peoples to the United States and their experiences in this country.Required service work and a research project in the Nashville Latino community. [3] (P)

LAS3500 - History of Environmental Law in Latin America and the CaribbeanComparative perspective from Colonial Period to present. Creation of laws and their impact. How marginalized groups navigated and/or resisted laws. Agriculture, mining, land-ownership, climate change. [3] (INT) LAS3851 - Independent Study

Comparative perspective from Colonial Period to present. Creation of laws and their impact. How marginalized groups navigated and/or resisted laws. Agriculture, mining, land-ownership, climate change. [3] (INT) LAS3851 - Independent StudyA program of independent readings or research to be selected in consultation with the center's undergraduate adviser. Open only to juniors and seniors. May be repeated for a total of 12 credits in 3851 and 3852 combined over a four semester period, but students may earn only up to 3 credits per semester of enrollment. [1-3; maximum of 12 credits total for four semesters of LAS 3851 and 3852] (No AXLE credit)

LAS3852 - Independent StudyA program of independent readings or research to be selected in consultation with the center's undergraduate adviser. Open only to juniors and seniors. May be repeated for a total of 12 credits in 3851 and 3852 combined over a four semester period, but students may earn only up to 3 credits per semester of enrollment. [1-3; maximum of 12 credits total for four semesters of LAS 3851 and 3852] (No AXLE credit)

LAS3880 - Internship TrainingUnder faculty supervision, students gain experience working in a variety of settings, such as civic, corporate, cultural, government, health, media, political, research, and social welfare organizations in the United States and Latin America. Background reading and research will be completed in Latin American Studies 3881concurrently with the completion of internship training, Latin American Studies 3880. A minimum of 3 hours of 3881 must be completed, independent of hours taken in 3880. Students may earn up to 6 hours of 3881 credit.A research paper and report must be submitted at the end of the semester during which the internship training is completed. A 2.90 grade point average, 6 hours of prior work in Latin American Studies, and prior approval of the director of undergraduate studies of the student's plans are required. Offered on a Pass/Fail basis only and must be taken concurrently with 3881. Hours of 3880 cannot be included in the minimum number of hours counted toward the Latin American Studies major or minor. Corequisite: 3881. [1-9] (No AXLE credit)

LAS3881 - Internship Readings and ResearchUnder faculty supervision, students gain experience working in a variety of settings, such as civic, corporate, cultural, government, health, media, political, research, and social welfare organizations in the United States and Latin America. Background reading and research will be completed in Latin American Studies 3881concurrently with the completion of internship training, Latin American Studies 3880. A minimum of 3 hours of 3881 must be completed, independent of hours taken in 3880. Students may earn up to 6 hours of 3881 credit.A research paper and report must be submitted at the end of the semester during which the internship training is completed. A 2.90 grade point average, 6 hours of prior work in Latin American Studies, and prior approval of the director of undergraduate studies of the student's plans are required. Corequisite: 3880. [3-6] (No AXLE

LAS3891 - Special Topics in Latin American StudiesSelected special topics suitable for interdisciplinary examination from the perspective of the social sciences and humanities. May be repeated for credit more than once if there is no duplication in topic. Students may enroll in more than one section of this course each semester. [3] (No AXLE credit)

LAS4550 - Gender, Sexuality, and Family in Latin AmericaEvolution of Latin American identity over time. [3] (INT)

LAS4901 - Research SeminarSelected topics for the interdisciplinary study of Latin America. [3] (No AXLE credit)

LATS1111 - First-Year Writing SeminarIndependent learning and inquiry in an environment in which students can express knowledge and defend opinions through intensive class discussion, oral presentations, and written expression. May be repeated for credit once if there is no duplication of topic, but students may earn only up to 3 credits in any 1111 course per semester of enrollment. [3; maximum of 6 credits total for all semesters of 1111] (AXLE credit category varies by section)

LATS2201 - Introduction to Latino and Latina StudiesFoundational course for interdisciplinary study of Americans of Hispanic heritage and their communities. History and cultural production. Interconnections and differences among diverse Hispanic communities. [3] (P) LATS3831 - Latino and Latina Business and Entrepreneurship

Foundational course for interdisciplinary study of Americans of Hispanic heritage and their communities. History and cultural production. Interconnections and differences among diverse Hispanic communities. [3] (P) LATS3831 - Latino and Latina Business and EntrepreneurshipResearch on Nashville's growing Latino and Latina communities. Types of businesses and how they function.Issues affecting businesses within the communities. Work with local community leaders. A service learning course. [3] (SBS)

LATS3850 - Independent Study1-3 credits per semester; maximum of 12 credits total for fours semesters of LATS 3850. [1-3] (No AXLE credit) LATS3880 - Internship Training

1-3 credits per semester; maximum of 12 credits total for fours semesters of LATS 3850. [1-3] (No AXLE credit) LATS3880 - Internship TrainingUnder faculty supervision, students can gain experience in a variety of settings relative to the Latinx experience. A research paper must be submitted. Normally, a 2.7 GPA, 6 hours of prior work in LATS, and prior approval of a specific plan by the director of the LATS program are required. [1-9] (No AXLE credit) LATS3881 - Internship Readings and Research

Under faculty supervision, students can gain experience in a variety of settings relative to the Latinx experience. A research paper must be submitted. Normally, a 2.7 GPA, 6 hours of prior work in LATS, and prior approval of a specific plan by the director of the LATS program are required. [1-9] (No AXLE credit) LATS3881 - Internship Readings and ResearchUnder faculty supervision, students can gain internship experience relative to the Latinx experience. Hours earned based upon readings and research supervised by LATS faculty to lend intellectual foundation to the internship experience. A research paper must be submitted at the end of the semester during which the internship is completed. [3-6] (No AXLE credit)

LATS4961 - Latino and Latina Studies SeminarOverview of cultural production, history, and political and socioeconomic experiences of Hispanic people living in the United States. Synthesis of issues, traditions, approaches, and problems. [3] (HCA)

MALA1101 - Elementary Malagasy I (Duke)Malagasy language, spoken by 25 million people in Madagascar and the Comoro Islands. Speaking, listening, reading, and writing. [3] (No AXLE credit)

MALA1102 - Elementary Malagasy II (Duke)Continuation of 1101. Speaking, listening, reading, writing the Malagasy language, which is spoken by 25 million people in Madagascar and the Comoro Islands. [3] (INT)

MSE1500 - Materials Science IConcepts of materials science developed from an understanding of the atomic and molecular structure of materials and their relationship to the properties of matter. Mechanical, electrical, physical, chemical, and magnetic properties of metals, ceramics, organics, composites, and semiconductors are covered. Corequisite: MSE 1500L. SPRING. [3]

MSE1500L - Materials Science LaboratoryLaboratory for MSE 1500. One three-hour laboratory per week. Corequisite: MSE 1500. SPRING. [1]

MSE2205 - Strength and Structure of Engineering MaterialsLaboratory supplement to CE 2205. Students conduct experiments on the strength behavior of materials and simple engineering structures. Includes: tension and bending, fasteners, photoelastic analysis of stress concentrators, strain gage instrumentation to determine principal stresses, bending and deflection curves for simple beams, loaded columns, and short struts. Corequisite: CE 2205. FALL. [1]

MSE2500 - Materials Science IIFunctional materials based on their electromagnetic, thermal and optical properties. Electrical and magnetic behavior of materials, semiconductivity, band gap engineering, nanostructures, and new materials, such as metamaterials. Case studies of devices found in modern vehicles, homes, communications systems, andcomputing devices. Prerequisite: MSE 1500. FALL. [3]

MSE3860 - Undergraduate ResearchOpen to select engineering students to do research under the guidance of a faculty member. A formal written report is required. [1-3]

MSE3890 - Special TopicsTechnical elective courses of special current interest. No more than two semesters of this course may be credited to the student's record. Prerequisite: consent of instructor. [Variable credit: 1-3 each semester]

MTED2200 - Mathematics for Elementary TeachersThis course is the first of a sequence designed for those students seeking elementary licsensure with an emphasis on grades preK-3. The course deals with issues of both content and pedagogy that are relevant to these grades. The course is prerequisite to MTED 3250 and may be taken concurrent with MTED 3251. [3]

MTED2300 - Pedagogy SeminarThis pedagogy seminar accompanies a core course in the College of Arts & Sciences and examines the process of teaching and learning of that course content. Students enrolled in the core course lecture may elect to participate in this accompanying one credit pedagogy seminar. This optional seminar will be team-taught by the core course instructor and an education faculty member. [1]

MTED3250 - Teaching Mathematics in Elementary SchoolsThis course is the second in a sequence of courses designed for those students seeking elementary licensure with an emphasis on grades 2-5. This course deals with issues of both content and pedagogy that are relevant to these grades.This course may be taken concurrent with MTED 3251. Prerequisite: MTED 2200. [2]

MTED3251 - Practicum in Elementary MathematicsField experiences providing students an opportunity to integrate and apply teaching skills developed in the elementary mathematics course. Students are placed in a local elementary school classroom and are given opportunities to engage in classroom observations, curriculum planning and implementation, and guided reflective practice. Corequisite: MTED 2200 or MTED 3250. May be taken only once. [1]

MTED3320 - Introduction to Literacies in MathematicsThis course is intended for licensure candidates in secondary education for mathematics and for other students who want to explore the concepts and practices of disciplinary literacy that is the links between content and communication. [3]

MTED3360 - Computers, Teaching, and Mathematical VisualizationExamining the 7-14 mathematics curriculum as a body of ideas that students can develop over time and the use of computer environments to support teaching and learning them. [3]

MTED3370 - Teaching Mathematics in Secondary SchoolsStudy of conceptual structure, curriculum, objectives, instructional approaches, materials, learning theory, and philosophies of assessment as they relate to teaching mathematics in middle and secondary schools.Prerequisite: EDUC 3310 or consent of instructor. Corequisite: MTED 3371. [3]

MTED3371 - Professional Year PracticumObservation, participation, and teaching in middle school and secondary school settings. Corequisite: MTED3370 [1-3]

MTED3850 - Independent Study in Mathematics EducationSemi-independent study on selected topics in mathematics education. May be repeated. Consent of supervising instructor. [1-3]

MTED3890 - Special Topics in Mathematics EducationExploration of special topics related to mathematics education. May be repeated with change of topic. [1-3]

MTED4963 - Student Teaching Seminar: SecondarySeminar to accompany EDUC 4953. A $300.00 Teacher Performance Assessment fee is associated with this course. [3]

MATH1001 - Commons iSeminarTopics vary. General Elective credit only. [1] (No AXLE credit)

MATH1005 - Pre-calculus MathematicsInequalities, functions and graphs, trigonometric identities, theory of equations. Designed for students who plan to take either 1200-1201 or 1300-1301 but need a stronger background in algebra and trigonometry. [3] (No AXLE credit)

MATH1010 - Probability and Statistical InferenceFor students not planning to major in science, engineering, or mathematics. Discrete and continuous probability models (exponential, binomial, Poisson, normal). Law of large numbers; conditional probability and Bayes theorem; counting techniques and combinatorics. Descriptive statistics: measures of central tendency and dispersion, histograms. [3] (No AXLE credit)

MATH1011 - Probability and Statistical InferenceFor students not planning to major in science, engineering, or mathematics. Linear regression, correlation, hypothesis testing. Confidence intervals, sampling distributions, statistical inference. Prerequisite: 1010. [3]

MATH1100 - Survey of CalculusA basic course in the rudiments of analytic geometry and differential and integral calculus with emphasis on applications. Designed for students who do not plan further study in calculus. Not open to students who have earned credit for MATH 1200, 1201, or 1300 without permission. Total credit for this course and MATH 1200 will not exceed 4 credit hours; Total credit for this course and MATH 1300 will not exceed 5 credit hours; Total credit for this course and MATH 1201 will not exceed 6 credit hours. Credit hours reduced from second course taken (or from test or transfer credit) as appropriate. [4] (MNS)

MATH1111 - First-Year Writing SeminarIndependent learning and inquiry in an environment in which students can express knowledge and defend opinions through intensive class discussion, oral presentations, and written expression. May be repeated for credit once if there is no duplication of topic, but students may earn only up to 3 credits in any 1111 course per semester of enrollment. [3; maximum of 6 credits total for all semesters of 1111] (AXLE credit category varies by section)

MATH1200 - Single-Variable Calculus IReview of algebra and trigonometry. Exponential functions; inverse functions and logarithms. Limits; differentiation of algebraic and transcendental functions; rules of differentiation; related rates. Three hours of lecture and one hour of recitation period per week. Not open to students who have earned credit for MATH 1100or 1300 without permission. Total credit for this course and MATH 1100 will not exceed 4 credit hours; Total credit for this course and MATH 1300 will not exceed 5 credit hours. Credit hours reduced from second course taken (or from test or transfer credit) as appropriate. [3] (MNS)

MATH1201 - Single-Variable Calculus IIMaximum and minimum values; curve sketching. Antiderivatives; the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus; areas and volumes; techniques of integration. Three hours of lecture and one hour of recitation period per week.Students who have earned credit for 1100 or 1301 will earn only two credits for this course. Not open to students who have earned credit for MATH 1100, 1300, or 1301 without permission. Total credit for this course and MATH 1100 or 1301 will not exceed 6 credit hours; Total credit for this course and MATH 1300 will not exceed 5 credit hours. Credit hours reduced from second course taken (or from test or transfer credit) as appropriate. Prerequisite: 1200. [3] (MNS)

MATH1300 - Accelerated Single-Variable Calculus IFunctions, limits, differentiation of algebraic functions, integration, applications including extrema problems, areas, volumes, centroids, and work. Not open to students who have earned credit for MATH 1100, 1200, or 1201 without permission. Total credit for this course and MATH 1100, 1200, or 1201 will not exceed 5 credit hours. Credit hours reduced from second course taken (or from test or transfer credit) as appropriate. [4] (MNS) MATH1301 - Accelerated Single-Variable Calculus II

Functions, limits, differentiation of algebraic functions, integration, applications including extrema problems, areas, volumes, centroids, and work. Not open to students who have earned credit for MATH 1100, 1200, or 1201 without permission. Total credit for this course and MATH 1100, 1200, or 1201 will not exceed 5 credit hours. Credit hours reduced from second course taken (or from test or transfer credit) as appropriate. [4] (MNS) MATH1301 - Accelerated Single-Variable Calculus IIDifferentiation and integration of transcendental functions, applications, methods of integration, coordinate geometry, polar coordinates, infinite series. Not open to students who have earned credit for MATH 1201without permission. Total credit for this course and MATH 1201 will not exceed 6 credit hours. Credit hours reduced from second course taken (or from test or transfer credit) as appropriate. Prerequisite: 1300 or 1201.[4] (MNS)

MATH2300 - Multivariable CalculusVectors, curves, and surfaces in space. Functions of several variables, partial derivatives, multiple integrals.Vector integral calculus, including line and surface integrals. Not open to students who have earned credit for MATH 2310, 2500, or 2501 without permission. Total credit for this course and MATH 2310 or 2501 will not exceed 4 credit hours; total credit for this course and MATH 2500 will not exceed 5 credit hours. Credit hours reduced from second course taken (or from test or transfer credit) as appropriate. Prerequisite: 1301 or 2200.[3] (MNS)

MATH2310 - Multivariable Calculus with Matrix AlgebraVectors and matrix operations. Linear transformations, dimension, and rank. Solutions of systems of linear equations. Eigenvalues and eigenvectors. Lines, planes, and subspaces. Limits, continuity, and the derivative of functions of several variables and vector-valued functions. Extremum and constrained optimization. Multiple integrals and change of variables. Applications to probability and statistics. Not open to students who have earned credit for MATH 2300, 2400, 2410, 2500, 2501, or 2600 without permission. Total credit for this course and MATH 2300, 2400, 2500, or 2501 will not exceed 4 credit hours; total credit for this course and MATH 2410or 2600 will not exceed 6 credit hours. Credit hours reduced from second course taken (or from test or transfer credit) as appropriate. Prerequisite: 1301. [4] (MNS)

MATH2400 - Differential Equations with Linear AlgebraScalar differential equations, Laplace transforms, systems of differential equations. Gauss-elimination, algebra of matrices, determinants, vector spaces, linear operators, eigenvalues and eigenvectors. Intended for students in Biomedical Engineering, Electrical Engineering and Computer Engineering. Not open to students who have earned credit for MATH 2310, 2410, 2420, 2500, 2501, or 2610 without permission. Total credit for this course and MATH 2310, 2410, 2420, 2500, 2501, or 2610 will not exceed 4 credit hours. Credit hours reduced from second course taken (or from test or transfer credit) as appropriate. Prerequisite or corequisite: 2300. [4] (No AXLE credit)

MATH2410 - Methods of Linear AlgebraVectors and matrix operations. Linear transformations and fundamental properties of finite dimensional vector spaces. Solutions of systems of linear equations. Eigenvalues and eigenvectors. Not open to students who have earned credit for MATH 2310, 2400, 2500, 2501, or 2600 without permission. Total credit for this course and MATH 2310 will not exceed 6 credit hours; total credit for this course and MATH 2400 or 2501 will not exceed 4credit hours; total credit for this course and MATH 2500 will not exceed 5 credit hours; total credit for this course and MATH 2600 will not exceed 3 credit hours. Credit hours reduced from second course taken (or from test or transfer credit) as appropriate. Prerequisite or corequisite: 2300. [3] (MNS)

MATH2420 - Methods of Ordinary Differential EquationsLinear first-order differential equations, applications, higher order linear differential equations, complementary and particular solutions, applications, Laplace transform methods, series solutions, numerical techniques. Not open to students who have earned credit for MATH 2400 or 2610 without permission. Total credit for this course and MATH 2400 will not exceed 4 credit hours; total credit for this course and MATH 2610 will not exceed 3credit hours. Credit hours reduced from second course taken (or from test or transfer credit) as appropriate.Prerequisite: 2300, 2310, or 2501. [3] (MNS)

MATH2500 - Multivariable Calculus and Linear AlgebraVector algebra and geometry; linear transformations and matrix algebra. Real and complex vector spaces, systems of linear equations, inner product spaces. Functions of several variables and vector-valued functions: limits, continuity, the derivative. Extremum and nonlinear problems, manifolds. Multiple integrals, line and surface integrals, differential forms, integration on manifolds, theorems of Green, Gauss, and Stokes.Eigenvectors and eigenvalues. Emphasis on rigorous proofs. Not open to students who have earned credit for MATH 2300, 2310, 2400, 2410, or 2600 without permission. Total credit for this course and MATH 2300 or 2410will not exceed 5 credit hours; total credit for this course and MATH 2310 or 2400 will not exceed 4 credit hours; total credit for this course and MATH 2600 will not exceed 6 credit hours. Credit hours reduced from second course taken (or from test or transfer credit) as appropriate. Open only to first-year students with a test score of 5 on the Calculus-BC Advanced Placement examination. [4] (MNS)

MATH2501 - Multivariable Calculus and Linear AlgebraContinuation of 2500. Vector algebra and geometry; linear transformations and matrix algebra. Real and complex vector spaces, systems of linear equations, inner product spaces. Functions of several variables and vector-valued functions: limits, continuity, the derivative. Extremum and nonlinear problems, manifolds. Multiple integrals, line and surface integrals, differential forms, integration on manifolds, theorems of Green, Gauss, and Stokes. Eigenvectors and eigenvalues. Emphasis on rigorous proofs. Not open to students who have earned credit for MATH 2300, 2310, 2400, 2410, or 2600 without permission. Total credit for this course and MATH2300, 2310, 2400, 2410, or 2600 will not exceed 4 credit hours. Credit hours reduced from second course taken (or from test or transfer credit) as appropriate. Prerequisite: 2500 and first-year standing. [4] (MNS) MATH2600 - Linear Algebra

2300, 2310, 2400, 2410, or 2600 will not exceed 4 credit hours. Credit hours reduced from second course taken (or from test or transfer credit) as appropriate. Prerequisite: 2500 and first-year standing. [4] (MNS) MATH2600 - Linear AlgebraAlgebra of matrices, real and complex vector spaces, linear transformations, and systems of linear equations.Eigenvalues, eigenvectors, inner product spaces, and orthonormal bases. Designed primarily for mathematics majors. Not open to students who have earned credit for MATH 2310, 2410, 2500, or 2501 without permission.Total credit for this course and MATH 2410 will not exceed 3 credit hours; total credit for this course and MATH2310 or 2500 will not exceed 6 credit hours; total credit for this course and MATH 2500 will not exceed 5 credit hours; total credit for this course and MATH 2501 will not exceed 4 credit hours. Credit hours reduced from second course taken (or from test or transfer credit) as appropriate. Prerequisite or corequisite: 2300 or 2310.[3] (MNS)

MATH2610 - Ordinary Differential EquationsFirst- and second-order differential equations, applications. Matrix methods for linear systems; stability theory of autonomous systems; existence and uniqueness theory. Intended for mathematics and advanced sciencemajors. Not open to students who have earned credit for MATH 2400 or 2420 without permission. Total credit for this course and MATH 2400 will not exceed 4 credit hours; total credit for this course and MATH 2420 will not exceed 3 credit hours. Credit hours reduced from second course taken (or from test or transfer credit) as appropriate. Prerequisite: concurrent enrollment in 2501; or prior credit for either 2501 or both 2300 or 2310and either 2410 or 2600. [3] (MNS)

MATH2810 - Probability and Statistics for EngineeringDiscrete and continuous probability functions, cumulative distributions. Normal distribution. Poisson distribution and Poisson process. Conditional probability and Bayes' formula. Point estimation and interval estimation.Hypothesis testing. Covariance and correlation. Linear regression theory and the principle of least squares.Monte Carlo methods. Intended for students in Electrical Engineering and Computer Engineering. Not open to students who have earned credit for MATH 2820 without permission. Total credit for this course and MATH 2820will not exceed 3 credit hours. Credit hours reduced from second course taken (or from test or transfer credit) as appropriate. Prerequisite: 2300, 2310, or 2501. [3] (No AXLE credit)

MATH2820 - Introduction to Probability and Mathematical StatisticsDiscrete and continuous probability models, mathematical expectation, moment generating functions, and joint densities. Point estimation, confidence intervals, hypothesis testing, and applications. Students taking 2820 are encouraged to take 2820L concurrently. Not open to students who have earned credit for MATH 2810 without permission. Total credit for this course and MATH 2810 will not exceed 3 credit hours. Credit hours reduced from second course taken (or from test or transfer credit) as appropriate. Prerequisite: 2300, 2310, or 2501. [3]

MATH2820L - Statistics LaboratoryApplications of the theory developed in 2820. Emphasis on data analysis and interpretation. Topics include the one- and two-sample problems, paired data, correlation and regression, chi-square, and model building. Pre- or corequisite: 2810 or 2820. [1] (No AXLE credit)

MATH2821 - Introduction to Applied StatisticsReview of basic applied statistics. Analysis of variance as a technique for interpreting experimental data.Generalized likelihood ratio principle, confounding, multiple comparisons, introduction to response surface methodology, and nonparameteric methods. Experimental designs: completely randomized, nested, orthogonal contrasts, randomized block, Latin squares, factorial, and fractional factorial. Prerequisite: 2810 or 2820. [3]

MATH3000 - History of MathematicsMajor developments in mathematics from ancient times to the early twentieth century. Emphasis both on the historical perspective and the mathematics; assignments include many exercises and theorems. Highlyrecommended for teacher candidates. Prerequisite: 2501 or both 2300 (or 2310) with either 2410 or 2600. [3]

MATH3010 - Intensive Problem Solving and ExpositionIntended to develop widely-applicable mathematical skills. Basic principles such as induction, the pigeonhole principle, symmetry, parity, and generating functions. Prerequisite: 2300, 2310, or 2500. [3] (MNS)

MATH3100 - Introduction to AnalysisProperties of real numbers, compactness and completeness. Limits, sequences and series, uniformconvergence, and power series. Basic properties of functions on the real line, and the elementary theory of differentiation and integration. Emphasis on methods of proof used in advanced mathematics courses.Prerequisite: 2501 or both 2300 (or 2310) with either 2410 or 2600. [3] (MNS)

MATH3110 - Complex VariablesComplex numbers, analytic and elementary functions, transformations of regions. Complex integrals, Cauchy's integral theorem and formula, Taylor and Laurent series. The calculus of residues with applications, conformal mappings. Prerequisite: 2300, 2310, or 2501. [3] (MNS)

MATH3120 - Introduction to Partial Differential EquationsInitial- and boundary-value problems for partial differential equations using separation of variables in conjunction with Fourier series and integrals. Explicit solutions of problems involving the heat equation, the wave equation, and Laplace's equation. Prerequisite: Either 2410, 2600, or 2501 and either 2400, 2420, or 2610. [3] (MNS)

MATH3130 - Fourier AnalysisFourier series topics including convolution, Poisson kernels, Dirichlet kernels, and pointwise and mean-square convergence. Integral transforms including one-dimensional and multidimensional Fourier integrals, Fourier inversion formula and Plancherel theorem, Poisson summation formula, Radon transform, and X-ray transform.Fourier analysis on Abelian groups including finite Fourier analysis and fast Fourier transform. Applications to signal processing, Shannon sampling theory, and/or compressed sensing. Prerequisite: Either 2501; or both 2300 (or 2310) with either 2410 or 2600. [3] (MNS)

MATH3200 - Introduction to TopologyOpen sets, closed sets, continuity, compactness, and connectivity. Subspaces, product spaces, and quotient spaces. Knot theory, topology of surfaces, and applications. Prerequisite: 2410, 2600, or 2501. [3] (MNS) MATH3210 - Transformation Geometry

Open sets, closed sets, continuity, compactness, and connectivity. Subspaces, product spaces, and quotient spaces. Knot theory, topology of surfaces, and applications. Prerequisite: 2410, 2600, or 2501. [3] (MNS) MATH3210 - Transformation GeometryTransformations of the plane, groups of transformations, reflections, glide reflections, classification of the isometries of the plane, frieze groups, analysis of frieze patterns, wall paper groups, and analysis of wall paper patterns. Especially recommended for prospective teachers of mathematics. Prerequisite: 2410, 2600, or 2501.[3] (MNS)

MATH3230 - Introduction to Differential GeometrySmooth maps, tangent space, and surfaces and hypersurfaces in n-dimensional Euclidean space. Inverse and Implicit Function theorems. Sard's theorem. Transversality. Degree of a map; intersection theory modulo 2.Orientability and oriented intersection number. Prerequisite: 2501 or both 2300 and either 2410 or 2600. [3]

MATH3300 - Abstract AlgebraFundamental properties of integers and polynomials. Elementary properties of groups, rings, integral domains, fields, and lattices. Prerequisite: 2410, 2600, or 2501. [3] (MNS)

MATH3310 - Introduction to Mathematical LogicDevelopment of the first order predicate calculus and fundamental metamathematical notions. Prerequisite: 2410, 2600, or 2501. [3] (MNS)

MATH3320 - Error-Correcting Codes and CryptographyApplications of algebra to reliability and secrecy of information transmission. Error-correcting codes, including linear, Hamming, and cyclic codes, and possibly BCH or Reed-Solomon codes. Cryptography, includingsymmetric-key, DES and RSA encryption. Prerequisite: 2410, 2600, or 2501. [3] (MNS)

MATH3330 - Advanced Linear AlgebraOrthogonal bases, orthogonal projections, Gram-Schmidt orthogonalization, Householder transformations, and Courant-Fisher min-max Theorem. Normal, self-adjoint matrices, pseudo inverses, and positive definite and semi-definite matrices. Matrix decompositions including QR factorization, diagonalization, Jordan decomposition, and singular value decomposition. Hilbert spaces, linear functionals, and Riesz Representation Theorem.Applications include least squares problems, regression models, optimization, data denoising, principle component analysis, and dimension reduction for data analysis. Serves as repeat credit for Math 3890 section 01 in Spring 2018 or Spring 2019. Prerequisite: 2410 or 2501 or 2600. [3] (MNS)

MATH3600 - Advanced Engineering MathematicsVector analysis including directional derivatives, transformation of coordinates, divergence and curl. Line integrals, surface integrals, and divergence theorem. Stokes' theorem. Functions of a complex variable, including limits, derivatives, and Cauchy-Riemann equations. Exponential, trigonometric, hyperbolic, and logarithmic functions. Complex integrals, Cauchy's integral theorem and formula. Taylor and Laurent series.Calculus of residues. Prerequisite: 2400, 2420, or 2610. [3] (MNS)

MATH3620 - Introduction to Numerical MathematicsNumerical solution of linear and nonlinear equations, interpolation and polynomial approximation, non-numerical differentiation and integration. Least-squares curve fitting and approximation theory, numerical solution of differential equations, errors and floating point arithmetic. Application of the theory to problems in science, engineering, and economics. Student use of the computer is emphasized. Familiarity with computer programming is expected. Prerequisite: Either 2410, 2600, or 2501, and either 2400, 2420, or 2610. [3] (MNS) MATH3630 - Mathematical Modeling in Biology and Medicine

(MNS) MATH3630 - Mathematical Modeling in Biology and MedicineBasic mathematical modeling tools, such as interpolation, least-squares regression, difference equations, and ordinary and partial differential equations. Statistical analysis of data, support vector machines, and computer simulation. Familiarity with computer programming is expected. Prerequisite: Either 2410, 2600, or 2501, and either 2400, 2420, or 2610. [3] (MNS)

MATH3640 - ProbabilityCombinatorics, probability models (binomial, Poisson, normal, gamma, etc.), Stochastic independence, generating functions, limit theorems and types of convergence, bivariate distributions, transformations of variables. Markov processes and applications. Prerequisite: 2810 or 2820. Co-requisite 2410, 2501, or 2600 [3]

MATH3641 - Mathematical StatisticsDistribution theory, order statistics, theory of point estimation and hypothesis testing, normal univariate inference, Bayesian methods, sequential procedures, regression, nonparametric methods. Students interested in applications may take 2820L. Prerequisite: 3640. [3] (MNS)

MATH3650 - Introduction to Financial MathematicsTheory of interest including time value of money, annuities, rates of return, yield curves, and immunization.Pricing of financial instruments including annuities, bonds, stocks, and derivatives using arbitrage-free assumptions. Foundational for actuarial science. Prerequisite: 2300, 2310, or 2501. Corequisite: 2810, 2820, or 3640. [3] (MNS)

MATH3651 - Actuarial ModelsProbabilistic analysis of insurance. Single-life models, including time-value of benefits, life annuities, premiums, and benefit reserves: Multiple-decrement models; Multiple-life models. Probabilistic topics: Markov chains and Poisson processes. Prerequisite: 3650 and either 2810, 2820 or 3640. [3] (MNS)

MATH3660 - Mathematical Modeling in EconomicsModeling microeconomic problems of supply and demand, profit maximization, and Nash equilibrium pricing.Auctions and bargaining models. Statistical models and data analysis. Computational experiments. Prerequisite: 2300, 2310, or 2501. [3] (MNS)

MATH3670 - Mathematical Data ScienceLinear methods for regression and classification, bias-variance tradeoff, and basis expansions andregularization. Kernel methods, support vector machines, dimension reduction, and clustering algorithms.Serves as repeat credit for MATH 3890-01 in Fall 2017. Prerequisite: one of 2810, 2820, or 3641; and one of 2410, 2501, or 2600. [3] (MNS)

MATH3700 - Discrete MathematicsElementary combinatorics including permutations and combinations, the principle of inclusion and exclusion, and recurrence relations. Graph theory including Eulerian and Hamiltonian graphs, trees, planarity, coloring, connectivity, network flows, some algorithms and their complexity. Selected topics from computer science and operations research. Prerequisite: 2410, 2600, or 2501. [3] (MNS)

MATH3800 - Theory of NumbersFactorization of integers, Fundamental Theorem of Arithmetic, congruences, Wilson's theorem. Fermat's theorem, arithmetic functions, perfect numbers, Law of Quadratic Reciprocity. Diophantine equations, Pythagorean triples, sums of squares. Prerequisite: 2410, 2600, or 2501. [3] (MNS)

MATH3859 - Independent StudyReading and independent study in mathematics under the supervision of an adviser. Designed primarily for honors candidates, but open to others with approval by department chair. [Variable credit: 1-3 each semester, not to exceed 6 without departmental permission] (No AXLE credit)

MATH3890 - Selected Topics for UndergraduatesTopics vary. May be repeated for a total of 12 credits in 3890 and 3895 combined if there is no duplication in topic. Students may enroll in more than one section of this course each semester. Prerequisite: 2501; or both 2300 (or 2310) with either 2410 or 2600. [1-3; maximum of 12 credits total for all semesters of MATH 3890 and 3895 combined] (No AXLE credit)

MATH4110 - Partial Differential EquationsClassification of equations: equations of elliptic, parabolic, and hyperbolic type. Separation of variables, orthonormal series, solutions of homogeneous and nonhomogeneous boundary value problems in one-, two-, and three-dimensional space. Possible additional topics include subharmonic functions and the Perron existence theorem for the Laplace equation of Sturm-Liouville theory. Prerequisite: Either 2410, 2600, or 2501, and either 2400, 2420, or 2610. [3] (MNS)

MATH4200 - TopologyConnectedness, compactness, countability, and separation axioms. Complete metric spaces. Function spaces.Prerequisite: 2501, 3200, or 4220. [3] (MNS)

MATH4201 - TopologyThe fundamental group and covering spaces. Topology of surfaces. Simplicial complexes and homology theory.Homotopy theory. Prerequisite: 4200. [3] (MNS)

MATH4300 - Modern AlgebraGroup theory through Sylow theorems and fundamental theorem of finitely generated abelian groups.Prerequisite: 3300. [3] (MNS)

MATH4301 - Modern AlgebraIntroductory theory of commutative rings and fields, and additional topics such as Galois theory, modules over a principal ideal domain and finite dimensional algebras. Prerequisite: 4300. [3] (MNS)

MATH4310 - Set TheoryThe basic operations on sets. Cardinal and ordinal numbers. The axiom of choice. Zorn's lemma, and the well-ordering principle. Introduction to the topology of metric spaces, including the concepts of continuity, compactness, connectivity, completeness, and separability. Product spaces. Applications to Euclidean spaces.Strongly recommended for beginning graduate students and for undergraduates who plan to do graduate work in mathematics. Prerequisite: 2501; or both 2300 (or 2310) with either 2410 or 2600. [3] (MNS)

MATH4320 - Lattice Theory and the Theory of Ordered SetsAn introduction to basic concepts and theorems in lattice theory and the theory of ordered sets with connections to universal algebra and computer science. Boolean algebras, modular and distributive lattices, ordered topological spaces, algebraic lattices and domains, fixed point theorems, cosets, free lattices. Prerequisite: 3300. [3] (MNS)

MATH4600 - Numerical AnalysisFinite difference and variational methods for elliptic boundary value problems, finite difference methods for parabolic and hyperbolic partial differential equations, and the matrix eigenvalue problem. Student use of the computer is emphasized. Prerequisite: 3620. [3] (MNS)

MATH4610 - Methods of Mathematical PhysicsLinear operators on vector spaces, matrix theory, and Hilbert spaces. Functions of a complex variable and calculus of residues. Ordinary and partial differential equations of mathematical physics, boundary value problems, special functions. Prerequisite: Either 2410, 2600, or 2501, and either 2400, 2420, or 2610. [3] (MNS) MATH4620 - Linear Optimization

MATH4620 - Linear OptimizationLinear programming and its applications. Formulation of linear programs. The simplex method, duality, complementary slackness, dual simplex method, and sensitivity analysis. The ellipsoid method. Interior point methods. Applications to networks, management, engineering, and physical sciences. Familiarity with computer programming is expected. Prerequisite: either 2410, 2600, or 2501. [3] (MNS)

MATH4630 - Nonlinear OptimizationMathematical modeling of optimization problems. Theory of unconstrained and constrained optimization, including convexity and the Karush-Kuhn-Tucker conditions. Derivative- and non-derivative-based methods.Familiarity with computer programming is expected. Prerequisite: 2501; or both 2300 (or 2310) and either 2410or 2600. [3] (MNS)

MATH4650 - Financial Stochastic ProcessesThe theory of stochastic processes and applications to financial economics. Brownian motion; martingales; It√¥'s Lemma; stochastic integration. Monte Carlo simulations with variance reduction techniques. Applications include discretetime option pricing and delta hedging. Prerequisite: 3650 and either 2810, 2820, or 3640. [3] (MNS) MATH4651 - Evaluation of Actuarial Models

(MNS) MATH4651 - Evaluation of Actuarial ModelsApplications of statistics to the evaluation and selection of actuarial models. Severity, frequency, and aggregate models. Measure of risk. Applications of Bayesian analysis to credibility theory. Simulation and bootstrap methods. Prerequisite: 3651, 3641, and 4650. [3] (MNS)

MATH4700 - CombinatoricsElements of enumerative analysis including permutations, combinations, generating functions, recurrence relations, the principle of inclusion and exclusion, and Polya's theorem. Some special topics will be treated as class interest and background indicate (e.g., Galois fields, theory of codes, and block designs). Students unfamiliar with permutations, combinations, and basic counting techniques should take 3700 prior to 4700.Prerequisite: 2410, 2600, or 2501. [3] (MNS)

MATH4710 - Graph TheoryThe mathematical theory of networks. Traversing graphs using paths, cycles, and trails. Matchings and other graph factors. Coloring of vertices and edges. Connectivity and its relation to paths and flows. Embeddings of graphs in surfaces, especially the plane. Prerequisite: linear algebra. Students unfamiliar with basic ideas of graph theory, including paths, cycles, and trees, should take 3700 prior to 4710. [3] (MNS)

MATH4999 - Senior ThesisA written presentation of research results, original for the student but not usually original in the larger sense.The regulations governing the writing of a master of arts thesis in mathematics will apply to the writing of the senior thesis. [3] (No AXLE credit)

ME1150 - Automotive Components SeminarGeneral automotive knowledge for engineering and design considerations. Basic component function,terminology and design. Suspension (including suspension kinematics), steering (including steering geometry), driveline, transmission, engine and braking. [1]

ME1151 - Laboratory in MachiningMachining and fabrication of metals and plastics. Fabrication, design and manufacturability of parts or components. [1]

ME1152 - Laboratory in WeldingTheory of welding processes and welding of metals. Design, fabrication, and manufacturability of parts or components using welding processes. [1]

ME1153 - Computer Aided DesignUse of computers for solid modeling of machine parts and assemblies. [1]

ME2160 - Introduction to Mechanical Engineering DesignDesign fundamentals, computer-aided design, machine fabrication techniques, technical drawing, team-based learning, and a comprehensive design project. Prerequisite: ES 1401-1403 and Mechanical Engineering major.FALL. [3]

ME2171 - Instrumentation LaboratoryTechniques associated with engineering measurements, curve fitting, presentation, and analysis of data.Corequisite: MATH 2300. SPRING. [2]

ME2190 - DynamicsThe principles of dynamics (kinematics and kinetics) of particles and rigid bodies. Mechanical vibrations.Continuous media. Prerequisite: CE 2200, PHYS 1601. Corequisite: MATH 2300. FALL, SPRING, SUMMER. [3]

ME2220 - ThermodynamicsApplication of the first and second laws to energy transformation processes and properties of technologically important materials. Prerequisite: PHYS 1601, MATH 2300. FALL, SPRING, SUMMER. [3]

ME3202 - Machine Analysis and DesignApplication of the principles of mechanics of materials to the analysis and synthesis of machine elements.Corequisite: CE 2205. FALL. [3]

ME3204 - MechatronicsDesign of analog and digital electromechanical sensors and actuators, signal and power electronics, and application of digital microcontrollers to mechatronic systems. Prerequisite: EECE 2112; CS 1100 or 1101 or 1103 or 1104. SPRING. [3]

ME3224 - Fluid MechanicsPhysical properties of fluids, surface tension, viscosity; fluid statics and dynamics; control volume analysis of mass, momentum, and energy; dimensional analysis, similitude, and modeling; viscous flows in pipes; drag and lift on immersed bodies. Prerequisite: ME 2190, MATH 2420. Credit not awarded for both ME 3224 and CE 3700.FALL. [3]

ME3234 - System DynamicsEnergy-based modeling of dynamic mechanical, electrical, thermal, and fluid systems to formulate linear state equations, including system stability, time domain response, and frequency domain techniques. Three lectures and one three-hour laboratory. Prerequisite: ME 2190, MATH 2420. FALL. [4]

ME3248 - Heat TransferSteady-state and transient heat transfer by conduction, forced and free convection and radiation, including heat transfer by boiling and condensing vapors. Application is made to practical design problems. Prerequisite: ME2220, ME 3224. SPRING. [3]

ME3273 - How to Make (Almost) Anything and Make it MatterNo-tech to high-tech tools and strategies for design. Practical aspects of 2D and 3D CAD for additive manufacturing and laser cutting. Hands-on experience with molding and casting, sewing, compositemanufacturing, foam fabrication, vacuum forming, material selection, and other methods to facilitate the prototyping process. Application of human-centered design in a team-based semester-long project with an external sponsor. Open to sophomores and juniors only. No prior engineering knowledge is required; all majors are eligible. [3]

ME3850 - Independent StudyUnder the direction of a faculty member, students study in a focused area of mechanical engineeringculminating in an engineering report of the activities and findings. [1-3 each semester; maximum of 6 hours total for all semesters of ME 3850]

ME3860 - Undergraduate ResearchUnder the direction of a faculty member, students conduct a research project. A formal, written report is required. No more than 6 hours of ME 3860 can be credited toward the degree. [1-3]

ME3890 - Special Topics[1-3 each semester]

ME4213 - Energetics LaboratoryExperimental methods in heat transfer, fluid mechanics, and thermodynamics as applied to energy conversion systems and their analyses. Prerequisite: Senior standing. FALL. [2]

ME4221 - Intermediate ThermodynamicsApplication of principles of thermodynamics to vapor and gas cycles, mixtures, combustion, and compressible flow. Prerequisite: ME 2220. Corequisite: MATH 2420. [3]

ME4226 - Gas DynamicsCompressible flow from subsonic to supersonic. Shock waves, expansion waves, shock tubes, and supersonic airfoils. Prerequisite: ME 3224. [3]

ME4236 - Linear Control TheoryClassical and modern approaches to the analysis and design of single-input/single-output (SISO) and multiple-input/multiple-output (MIMO) linear time invariant control systems. Classical (frequency-domain) and modern (state-space) approaches to SISO and MIMO control, including optimal control methods. Prerequisite: ME 3234.FALL. [3]

ME4251 - Modern Manufacturing ProcessesManufacturing science and processes. A quantitative approach dealing with metals, ceramics, polymers, composites, and nanofabrication and microfabrication technologies. Prerequisite: ME 3202. Corequisite: ME4950. [3]

ME4258 - Engineering AcousticsThe wave equation and its solutions; acoustic sources; reflection and transmission of sound; propagation in pipes, cavities, and waveguides; noise standards and effects of noise on people; principles of noise and vibration control; signal processing in acoustics; environmental noise measurement and control; and variouscontemporary examples. Prerequisite: MATH 2400 or 2420. [3]

ME4259 - Engineering VibrationsTheory of vibrating systems and application to problems related to mechanical design. Topics include single degree of freedom systems subject to free, forced, and transient vibrations; systems with several degrees of freedom, methods of vibration suppression and isolation, and critical speed phenomena. Prerequisite: ME 2190, MATH 2420. [3]

ME4260 - Energy ConversionEnergy resources, use, and conservation are studied. The fundamentals of positive displacement machinery, turbo-machinery, and reactive mixture are introduced and used to examine various forms of power-producing systems. Prerequisite: ME 2220, ME 3224. [3]

ME4261 - Basic Airplane AerodynamicsStudy of the atmosphere; analysis of incompressible and compressible flows, shock waves, boundary layer and skin friction drag, lift and drag forces over airfoils and wings, and flight performance; aircraft stability and control, wing icing, and parachute-based recovery; history of flight and aerodynamics. Corequisite: ME 3224. [3]

ME4262 - Environmental ControlHeating and cooling systems, energy conservation techniques, use of solar energy and heat pumps.Prerequisite: ME 2220. Corequisite: ME 3248. [3]

ME4263 - Computational Fluid Dynamics and Multiphysics ModelingComputational modeling of viscous fluid flows and thermal-fluid-structure interaction. Computational techniques including finite-difference, finite-volume, and finite-element methods; accuracy, convergence, and stability of numerical methods; turbulence modeling; rotating machinery; multiphase flows; and multiphysics modeling.Prerequisite: ME 3224. SPRING. [3]

ME4264 - Internal Combustion EnginesThermodynamics of spark ignition and compression ignition engines; gas turbines and jet propulsion.Prerequisite: ME 2220. [3]

ME4265 - Direct Energy ConversionThe principles and devices involved in converting other forms of energy to electrical energy. Conversion devices: electro-mechanical, thermoelectric, thermionic, fluid dynamic, and fuel cell. Prerequisite: ME 2220. [3]

ME4267 - Aerospace PropulsionApplication of classical mechanics and thermodynamics to rocket and aircraft propulsion. Design andperformance analysis of air-breathing and chemical rocket engines. Advanced propulsion systems forinterplanetary travel. Contemporary issues in aerospace propulsion: space exploration, renewable fuels.Prerequisite: ME 2220, ME 3224. [3]

ME4271 - RoboticsHistory and application of robots. Robotic mechanical architecture, mobility analysis of linkages, rotations and rigid body transformations and their parametrizations. Homogeneous coordinates of points and lines,exponential coordinates of rotation and twist coordinates, direct and inverse position analysis of serial manipulators and elimination theory. Serial robot statics and compliance, motion interpolation/path planning, instantaneous kinematics and Jacobian formulations. Lagrangian dynamics of serial robots, and motion control.Prerequisite: One of MATH 2400, 2410, 2500, 2501, or 2600. [3]

ME4275 - Finite Element AnalysisDevelopment and solution of finite element equations for solid mechanics and heat transfer problems.Commercial finite element and pre- and post-processing software. Prerequisite: CE 2205, MATH 2420. [3]

ME4280 - Advanced Dynamics of Mechanical SystemsDevelopment of methods for formulating differential equations to model mechanical systems, including formalisms of Newton-Euler, Lagrange, and virtual work methods to two- and three-dimensional systems.Prerequisite: ME 2190, MATH 2420. [3]

ME4284 - Modeling and Simulation of Dynamic SystemsIncorporates bond graph techniques for energy-based lumped-parameter systems. Includes modeling ofelectrical, mechanical, hydraulic, magnetic and thermal energy domains. Emphasis on multi-domain interaction.Prerequisite: ME 3234. [3]

ME4950 - Design SynthesisDevelopment of the design process: problem definition, design specifications, solution identification, idea synthesis, modeling and simulation, and design completion. Critical elements include problem selection, idea synthesis, and proposal writing. Individual design synthesis study projects required. Prerequisite: ME 2160 and senior standing in Mechanical Engineering. FALL. [2]

ME4951 - Engineering Design ProjectsEach student participates in a major group design project. Lectures will cover case studies and topics of current interest in design. Prerequisite: ME 4950. SPRING. [3]

ME4959 - Senior Engineering Design SeminarElements of professional engineering practice. Professionalism, licensing, ethics and ethical issues, intellectual property, contracts, liability, risk, reliability and safety, interdisciplinary teams and team tools, codes, standards, professional organizations, careers, entrepreneurship, human factors, and industrial design. Prerequisite: senior standing. Corequisite: ME 4950. FALL. [1]

MHS1001 - Commons iSeminarTopics vary. General Elective credit only. [1] (No AXLE credit)

MHS1111 - First-Year Writing SeminarIndependent learning and inquiry in an environment in which students can express knowledge and defend opinions through intensive class discussion, oral presentations, and written expression. May be repeated for credit once if there is no duplication of topic, but students may earn only up to 3 credits in any 1111 course per semester of enrollment. [3; maximum of 6 credits total for all semesters of 1111] (AXLE credit category varies by section)

MHS1500 - Introduction to MicrobiologyDiversity of bacteria and viruses. Genetics and metabolism of bacteria. Pathogenesis, host immune defense mechanisms, rationale for antimicrobial drugs. Bacteria, fungi, viruses, and parasites important to humans. No credit for students who have earned credit for NURS 1500. [3-4] (MNS)

MHS1600 - Introduction to Nutrition and Health for a Changing WorldNutrition science and research; basic principles of digestion and absorption; role of specific nutrients and dietary practices in health promotion and chronic disease prevention. Nutrition throughout the lifespan. Not intended for students who have previously taken NURS 1601 or NURS 1602. [3] (MNS)

MHS1920 - Politics of HealthSociocultural analysis of the conflicts, definitions, inequalities, and structures of power that influence health. [3]

MHS1930 - Social Dimensions of Health and IllnessMultidisciplinary introduction to health conditions from perspectives of anthropology, economics, history, political science and policy studies, philosophy, religious studies, and sociology. Guest lectures by representatives of various disciplines. [3] (P)

MHS1940 - Racial and Ethnic Health DisparitiesRelationship between health outcomes and race and ethnicity. Historical and contemporary factors influencing differences in health outcomes, including mental health, HIV/AIDS, and other chronic diseases. Explanations of health disparities and of strategies to reduce them. [3] (SBS)

MHS1950 - Theories of the BodyInterdisciplinary study of the human body through critical theory, history, philosophy, art, and popular culture.How cultural understandings of bodies reflect broader social, political, scientific, and legal regimes. [3] (HCA) MHS1960 - Health Humanities

How cultural understandings of bodies reflect broader social, political, scientific, and legal regimes. [3] (HCA) MHS1960 - Health HumanitiesCultural, political, and material aspects of human health through novels, memoirs, articles, poems, and films.Serves as repeat credit for students who have earned credit for MHS 3890-04 offered spring 2019 and fall 2018.[3] (HCA)

MHS2110 - American Medicine and the WorldSocial foundations of medical authority. Health disparities in the United States and abroad. Effects of social settings of medical research, evaluation, and treatment on health outcomes. Inequalities in medical knowledge and institutions. [3] (P)

MHS2120 - Health Social MovementsHealth inequality and inequity based on race, ethnicity, gender, class, and sexuality. Issues related to access to health care services. Crusades for certain diseases, illness experiences, and disabilities. Challenging science on etiology, diagnosis, treatment, and prevention. [3] (P)

MHS2130 - Social Movements and Community ActionThe literature of social activism. How citizens individually and collectively accomplish and resist social change.Historical and contemporary health movements as case studies to illustrate the advantages and limitations of social change strategies. [3] (SBS)

MHS2140 - Health Care in the United States: Policy and PoliticsPublic health and health care delivery systems. Evolving social and economic climates that shape health. Topics include health care access, cost, quality, and health disparities; trends in health care industries; the global COVID-19 pandemic; and comparative health systems. Not open to students who have completed MHS 3890-06offered spring 2021, or MHS 3890-03 offered fall 2020. [3] (US)

MHS2150 - Medical HumanitiesConceptual and creative analysis of philosophy, literature, art, and music to identify and account for human nature in the medical context. Ethical, practical, and social management of medical technology. Theories of art, music, and literature to understand human creativity and self-explanation in the face of illness and difference.[3] (HCA)

MHS2210 - Examining Care & CaregivingVarious cultural conceptions of what counts as good care, drawn from anthropology, sociology, films, and literature. Medicare, Medicaid; home healthcare of older adults in the United States, South Korea, Denmark, and Thailand. Drug treatment and sexual assault survivor programs. Provision of care during epidemics and pandemics. Not open to students who have completed MHS 3890-01 offered Spring 2021.[3] (P)

MHS2230 - Masculinity and Men's HealthInterdisciplinary approach to men's health issues and to perceptions of masculinity. The history of men's diseases. Men in clinical settings. Social policies that affect men's health behaviors. [3] (P)

MHS2240 - Bionic Bodies, Disability CulturesHistorical and cultural evolution of prosthetics, artificial limbs, and other assistive technologies. Shifts in social views resulting from war, economics, and art and design. [3] (HCA)

MHS2250 - War and the BodyImpact of war on the human body. Anthropology of the body and theories of bodily experience. Production, representation, and experience of war and of military and medical technologies on a bodily level. Acceptable and unacceptable types of harm. [3] (P)

MHS2260 - LGBTQ Health DisparitiesMHS2310 - Chinese Society and MedicineCourse DescriptionMedicine and health in contemporary China. Social organization of medical care, social determinants of health and disease, social construction of health and disease, and health-related social problems. [3] (SBS) MHS2320 - Medicine, Law, and Society

MHS2310 - Chinese Society and MedicineMedicine and health in contemporary China. Social organization of medical care, social determinants of health and disease, social construction of health and disease, and health-related social problems. [3] (SBS) MHS2320 - Medicine, Law, and Society

Medicine and health in contemporary China. Social organization of medical care, social determinants of health and disease, social construction of health and disease, and health-related social problems. [3] (SBS) MHS2320 - Medicine, Law, and SocietySurvey of issues in medicine and law, including the physician-patient relationship, medical malpractice, organ donation, healthcare financing, and the limits and powers of the government to protect the public's health. [3]

MHS2330 - Men's Health Research & PolicyConcepts and theories of men's health. Global and domestic issues. Effect of men's social and economic advantages on health outcomes. Strategies to improve men's health; relationships between cultural values and health policy; and cultural explanations that shape men's health campaigns. [3] (SBS)

MHS2333 - Policing the PandemicFull description pending. [3]

MHS2350 - Italian Representations of Wellness and IllnessFrom 1300 to the present. Depictions of health and sickness in Italian literature, art, and film. Historical, cultural, and social dimensions of health in Italy and changes in the societal approach to health. Italian society's views on health, wellness, and the stigmatization of physical and mental illness. [3] (INT)

MHS2410 - HIV/AIDS in the Global CommunityMedical, social, political, economic, and public policy dimensions of HIV/AIDS. Prevention and treatment strategies, social stigma, and discrimination. [3] (P)

MHS2420 - Economic Demography and Global HealthEconomic consequences of demographic change in developing and developed countries. Links betweensocioeconomic status and health; relationship between health and economic growth; determinants of fertility, mortality, and migration. [3] (SBS)

MHS2430 - Social Capital and HealthTheoretical approaches to social capital and their applications to the social production of disease and illness.Theoretical background of social capital; the conceptualization and measurement of social capital; and the multiple roles of social capital as a social antecedent of health. [3] (SBS)

MHS2510 - Caring for Vulnerable PopulationsHumanitarian aid and the risks and responsibilities in providing for vulnerable populations. Differences between acute and chronic crises. Geopolitical, cultural, clinical, and practical factors. [3] (No AXLE credit) MHS2520 - Autism in Context

Humanitarian aid and the risks and responsibilities in providing for vulnerable populations. Differences between acute and chronic crises. Geopolitical, cultural, clinical, and practical factors. [3] (No AXLE credit) MHS2520 - Autism in ContextMultiple manifestations. Impact, questions, and debates. Familial, educational, sociological, legal, and medical contexts. [3] (SBS)

MHS2610 - Global Health CrisesDevelopment of global health priorities, responses to emerging crises, and unintended consequences of global health interventions. [3] (INT)

MHS2700 - Trauma, Violence, & HealthVarious types of traumas and how they impact people and communities; short- and long-term psychological, behavioral, and physical effects. Influences on physical and mental health, interactions with the health care system and health care providers, educational outcomes, and quality of relationships. Theories of trauma, interventions, empirical studies, and mass traumas, with attention to issues of diverse populations and multiculturalism. Serves as repeat credit for students who have completed MHS 3890 section 02 offered fall 2019, or 3890 section 07 offered spring 2020, or 3890 section 02 offered fall 2020, or 3890 section 07 offered spring 2021, or 3890 section 01 offered summer 2021, or 3890 section 01 offered fall 2021, or 3890 sections 07or 08 offered spring 2022. [3] (P)

MHS2920 - Medicine on TrialMedicine as an object of dispute and a source of evidence in courts of law. Key cases and issues in Western law.Medicine adjudicated in religious, military, tribal, national, and international courts. [3] (SBS)

MHS2940 - Race, Citizenship, and HealthSocial and historical impacts of immigration, settlement, nation formation, labor exploitation, imperialism, and globalization on populations categorized as victims, vectors of disease, or sanitary citizens. Health as a key site in which the meaning of race and citizenship are developed and navigated. [3] (P)

MHS2950 - Healing AnimalsAnimals as subjects of medical research and as patients in veterinary medicine. Health of animals as friends, food, entertainment, and vectors of disease. Celebration and concealment of the centrality of animals in modern medicine through legal, economic, social, and emotional techniques. [3] (P)

MHS3000 - Undergraduate SeminarAdvanced reading, research, and writing. Topics vary. Limited to juniors and seniors with preference to majors in Medicine, Health, and Society. May be repeated for credit once if there is no duplication in topic. Students may enroll in more than one section of this course each semester. Offered on a graded basis only. [1-3; maximum of 6 credits total for all semesters of MHS 3000] (No AXLE credit)

MHS3010 - Global Health Principles and PracticeIntroduction to major global health principles and practices in the developing and developed world. Perspectives of public health practitioners and critical thinking about global health challenges and solutions. [3] (P) MHS3020 - U.S. Public Health Ethics and Policy

Introduction to major global health principles and practices in the developing and developed world. Perspectives of public health practitioners and critical thinking about global health challenges and solutions. [3] (P) MHS3020 - U.S. Public Health Ethics and PolicyCritical perspectives on ethical and policy issues in U.S. public health. [3] (P)

MHS3030 - Community Health ResearchConceptual and methodological challenges. Focus on descriptive studies and intervention research to address health disparities in chronic diseases and psychiatric disorders. [3] (SBS)

MHS3040 - Designing Healthy PublicsPolitics of public health and the built environment in U.S. cities from the nineteenth century to the present.Critical perspectives on health promotion, research, and design. Nashville as a case study. [3] (US) MHS3045 - Epidemics and Society

Critical perspectives on health promotion, research, and design. Nashville as a case study. [3] (US) MHS3045 - Epidemics and SocietyDisease outbreaks shaping society throughout history. National responses to epidemics; legacy of colonialism and its influences on health outcomes. Critical thinking about global health challenges, strategies, and solutions.[3] (INT)

MHS3050W - Medicine and LiteratureNarrative analysis, and other humanistic, interpretative practices of relevance to medicine and health. [3] (HCA) MHS3075 - Mental Health Policy

Narrative analysis, and other humanistic, interpretative practices of relevance to medicine and health. [3] (HCA) MHS3075 - Mental Health PolicyContemporary policymaking and research on mental health. Legislative and care-related approaches to mental health and substance use in historical context. The opioid epidemic; special populations, and current active policy debates. Serves as repeat credit for MHS 3890, section 11 in Fall 2022. [3] (No Axle Credit)

MHS3110 - Global Health and Social JusticeGlobal health institutions, policies, and practices. Issues of social justice. Anthropological, sociological, and scientific studies that address the social, moral, political and economic factors influencing the definition of and response to global health problems. [3] (P)

MHS3120 - Medicine, Technology, and SocietyTensions between art and science in medicine. The effects of science and technology on the doctor-patient relationship. Social and ethical issues raised by new biomedical developments. [3] (SBS)

MHS3140 - Afrofuturism and Cultural Criticisms of MedicineExploration of Afrofuturism as a literary genre and its critique of the impact of techno-science and medicine on black health, life, and futurity. Multidisciplinary approach in understanding novels, memoirs, and secondary texts. [3] (HCA)

MHS3150 - Death and Dying in AmericaInterdisciplinary introduction to thanatology; changes in medicine and attitudes towards dying as they reshape the American way of death in a multicultural landscape. [3] (P)

MHS3210 - Health, Development, and Culture in GuatemalaSocial dimensions of health in Guatemalan communities. History, culture, and political economy. Spanish language skills strongly recommended. Instructor consent required. [3] (INT)

MHS3212 - Health, Development, and Culture in GuatemalaSocial and political dimensions of health and development in Guatemala through fieldwork and service learning in rural Maya communities in Quetzaltenango and Solol√°. Prerequisite: 3210. [1-3] (No AXLE credit)

MHS3220 - Healthcare OrganizationsKey healthcare organizations in the context of policies governing the U.S. healthcare system. How organizations and policies shape the meaning of health and the dynamics of medical encounters. [3] (SBS)

MHS3250 - Perspectives on TraumaTrauma as a framework for understanding individual and collective suffering. Trauma in the context of medicine, war, and politics, and of racial, sexual, and gender inequalities. Alternative ways of conceptualizing feeling, memory and loss. [3] (SBS)

MHS3310 - Healthcare Systems ComparisonsMaymester. Travel to France and Italy. Comparison of US healthcare system to universal healthcare systems.On-site healthcare facilities visits. Role of government, insurance coverage and financing, strategies, quality of care, disparities, care coordination, electronic health records, costs, innovations and reforms. Taught in English.Offered on a graded basis only. [3] (INT)

MHS3320 - Introduction to U.S. Health Care PolicyKey features of U.S. health care system. Financing and delivery; historical trends; and comparisons to other countries. Methods of health policy evaluation. [3] (SBS)

MHS3333 - Health Policy and the Trump AdministrationFull description pending. [3]

MHS3350 - Medicine, Religion, and SpiritualityHow individuals, families, and communities deal with such life events as birth, serious illness and injury, disability, war, and death through the combined belief in medicine and religion. Sources include fiction, poetry, drama, film, and texts. Research seminar. [3] (No AXLE credit)

MHS3450 - Mental Illness NarrativesMental illness experiences through memoir, film, and spoken word. Serves as repeat credit for MHS 3890 Section 01 in Spring 2017. [3] (P)

MHS3830 - Service LearningUnder faculty supervision, students will design a program of community service associated with a set of learning objectives. The service component (3830) should benefit both the recipient and the provider of the service, offering the latter opportunities for self-reflection, self-discovery, and the development of values, skills, and knowledge. A central objective must be firsthand experience of a central issue or issues studied in sociology, psychology, political science, economics, or another academic discipline. The MHS program will work to find placements for interested students. The other component, 3831, will consist of an independent study in the relevant discipline and must be closely linked to the issue(s) addressed in 3830. For example, a student may provide services to the elderly in nursing homes and use 3831 to study how state and federal policies affect the delivery of health care and other services to nursing home populations. To be accepted, students must have a 2.90 overall grade point average and 6 hours of prior work in approved MHS courses. They must submit a specific plan for the service-learning experience to the MHS program director. Must be taken Pass/Fail and concurrently with 3831. These hours shall not be included in the minimum hours required for the MHS major or minor. After completing the experience, all students must write a thorough report. Corequisite: 3831. [1-3] (No AXLE credit)

MHS3831 - Service Learning Research and ReadingsUnder faculty supervision, students will design a program of community service associated with a set of learning objectives. The service component (3830) should benefit both the recipient and the provider of the service, offering the latter opportunities for self-reflection, self-discovery, and the development of values, skills, and knowledge. A central objective must be firsthand experience of a central issue or issues studied in sociology, psychology, political science, economics, or another academic discipline. The MHS program will work to find placements for interested students. The other component - 3831 - will consist of an independent study in the relevant discipline and must be closely linked to the issue(s) addressed in 3830. For example, a student may provide services to the elderly in nursing homes and use 3831 to study how state and federal policies affect the delivery of health care and other services to nursing home populations. To be accepted, students must have a 2.90 overall grade point average and 6 hours of prior work in approved MHS courses. They must submit a specific plan for the service-learning experience to the MHS program director. Students will write a substantial research or interpretative paper under the supervision of a Vanderbilt faculty member on a topic related to their service learning experience. Corequisite: 3830. [1-3] (No AXLE credit)

MHS3850 - Independent StudyA program of reading and/or research in one area of MHS studies to be selected in consultation with an adviser.Normally limited to qualified MHS minors or majors. Approval of faculty adviser and MHS program director required for enrollment. May be repeated for credit once if there is no duplication in topic, but students may earn only up to 3 credits per semester of enrollment. (However, students in the MHS honors program may count a total of 12 hours in MHS 3850, including the 6 hours in the senior year devoted to preparation of the honors thesis. The same instructor will ordinarily supervise work on the honors thesis in both fall and spring semesters; a student may work with a thesis adviser who has previously supervised an independent study with that student.) [1-3; maximum of 6 credits for all semesters of MHS 3850; maximum of 12 credits for students in the MHS honors program] (No AXLE credit)

MHS3880 - Internship TrainingUnder faculty supervision, students from any discipline can gain experience in a broad range of public and private agencies, institutions, and programs devoted to health care, public health, health-related policy and research. Two options are available. (1) Full-time: 12-15 hours total, including 6-9 hours in 3880, and 6 hours in 3881. (2) Part-time: 2-9 hours total, including 1-6 hours in 3880 and 1-3 hours in 3881. To be accepted for either option, students must have a 2.90 grade point average and 6 hours of prior work in approved MHScourses; they must submit a specific plan for the internship to the MHS program director. After completing the internship, all students must write a thorough report. Note: All work for an internship must be completed during a single semester or summer. Must be taken Pass/Fail and concurrently with 3881. These hours shall not be included in the minimum hours required for the MHS major or minor. Corequisite: 3881. [Variable credit: 1-9]

MHS3881 - Internship Readings and ResearchUnder faculty supervision, students from any discipline can gain experience in a broad range of public and private agencies, institutions, and programs devoted to health care, public health, health-related policy and research. Two options are available. (1) Full-time: 12-15 hours total, including 6-9 hours in 3880, and 6 hours in 3881. (2) Part-time: 2-9 hours total, including 1-6 hours in 3880 and 1-3 hours in 3881. To be accepted for either option, students must have a 2.90 grade point average and 6 hours of prior work in approved MHSMHS3890 - Special TopicsCourse DescriptionMay be repeated for credit if there is no duplication in topic. Students may enroll in more than one section of this course each semester. [1-3; maximum of 9 credits total for all semesters of MHS 3890] (No AXLE credit) MHS4010 - Psychiatry, Culture, and Globalization

MHS3890 - Special TopicsMay be repeated for credit if there is no duplication in topic. Students may enroll in more than one section of this course each semester. [1-3; maximum of 9 credits total for all semesters of MHS 3890] (No AXLE credit) MHS4010 - Psychiatry, Culture, and Globalization

May be repeated for credit if there is no duplication in topic. Students may enroll in more than one section of this course each semester. [1-3; maximum of 9 credits total for all semesters of MHS 3890] (No AXLE credit) MHS4010 - Psychiatry, Culture, and GlobalizationCross-cultural analysis of mental illness; the emergence of cultural psychiatry; and the globalization of biopsychiatry and neuroscience. [3] (P)

MHS4050 - Narrative and Medicine: Stories of Illness and the Doctor-Patient RelationshipUse of classical and contemporary illness narratives to understand the doctor-patient relationship. Focus on patient stories in clinical settings. [3] (HCA)

MHS4998 - Honors ResearchOffered on a graded basis only. Limited to seniors admitted to the departmental honors program. [3] (No AXLE

MHS4999 - Honors ThesisOffered on a graded basis only. Limited to seniors admitted to the departmental honors program. [3] (No AXLE

MS-PC1210 - Leadership and Personal DevelopmentLeadership is one of the most compelling topics of our time, and might be one of the most important attributes for effectiveness in all levels of human endeavor. The success of one of the most admired and respected institutions in our country, the military is founded upon the understanding and effective application of leadership, and the development of leaders. This course introduces students to the personal challenges and competencies that are critical to effective leadership. The focus is on developing basic knowledge and comprehension of leadership attributes and core leader competencies in a universal setting and exploring potential applications of these principles and practices at Vanderbilt, in the military and in the corporate world.[1]

MS-PC1210L - Leadership and Personal Development LabLeader development is a continuous process of training, assessment and feedback with the goal of instilling and enhancing desirable behavior in individuals and organizations. Within the military science curriculum, this process is called the Leadership Development Program (LDP), modeled after the principles spelled out in Field Manual 22-100, Army Leadership, and standardized both on campus and Leadership Development andAssessment Course (LDAC) environments. The flexible methodology of LDP accommodates personalized,individual development at all levels of proficiency throughout the officer educational experience, from program entry to commissioning. The LDP includes basic leadership training, periodic assessment and counseling at both team and individual levels by experience observers. Trends and deficiencies are identified and addressed with retraining and reassessment in a continuous cycle. Effective leader development is progressive, building on lessons learned and maximizing individual potential. This course introduces students to the leadership development process by providing structured leadership opportunities in a variety of training settings. Student performance in leadership roles is assessed and notable strengths and weaknesses are identified. A plan for improvement is discussed in detail during one-on-one counseling sessions. [1]

MS-PC1230 - Leadership and Personal Development IIWhat motivates others to follow a person is intriguing, inspiring and alluring. Through routine observation, we learn from leaders regardless of the setting (military, business, education, etc.) This course provides an overview of leadership fundamentals such as setting direction, problem-solving, listening and providing feedback. You will explore dimensions of leadership, values, attributes, skills, and actions in a military context through practical, hands-on, and interactive exercises. [1]

MS-PC1230L - Leadership and Personal Development II LabLeader development is a continuous process of training, assessment and feedback with the goal of instilling and enhancing desirable behavior in individuals and organizations, this process is called the Leadership Development Program. Effective leader development is progressive, building on lessons learned and maximizing individual potential. This course introduces students to the leadership development process by providing structured leadership opportunities in a variety of training settings. A plan for improvement is discussed in detail during one-on-one counseling sessions. [1]

MS-PC2150 - Foundations of LeadershipThis course introduces the process of understanding and defining leaders in order to develop leadership skills appropriate for future commissioned Army officers. The class is broken down into five key skill development areas: 1) values and ethics, 2) personal development, 3) officership, 4) leadership and, 5) tactics and techniques. The class emphasizes individual leadership values and characteristics with a focus on Leadership Theory and Interpersonal Communications, Army Values, Troop Leading Procedures, Problem Solving, and Team Building in a military environment. [2]

MS-PC2150L - Foundations of Leadership LabThis lab builds upon the classroom topics in MS-PC 2150 and introduces the process of understanding and defining leaders in order to develop leadership skills appropriate for the future commissioned officers. The lab is broken down into five key skill development areas: 1) leadership, 2) values and ethics, 3) personaldevelopment, 4) professional Officership, and 5) various tactics, techniques, and procedures. The lab emphasizes individual leadership values and characteristics with a focus on Leadership Theory andInterpersonal Communications, Army Values, Troop Leading Procedures, Problem Solving, and Team Building in a military environment. [1]

MS-PC2160 - Foundations of Tactical LeadershipThis course builds upon MS-PC 2150. The course is broken down into five key skill development levels: 1) leadership, 2) values and ethics, 3) personal development, 4) professional officership, and 5) various tactics, techniques, and procedures. This class will focus on individual leadership development where the student begins to plan, organize, and lead small teams and groups in situational training exercises. Students begin to apply leadership skills at the smallest unit level. [2]

MS-PC2160L - Foundations of Tactical Leadership LabThis course builds upon MS-PC 2150 and 2150L. The lab is broken down into five key skill development levels: 1) leadership, 2) values and ethics, 3) personal development, 4) professional officership, and 5) various tactics, techniques, and procedures. This class will focus on individual leadership development where the student begins to plan, organize, and lead small teams and groups in situational training exercises. Students begin to apply leadership skills at the smallest unit level. [1]

MS-PC3110 - Leadership and Problem SolvingThis course builds upon your skills developed in MS-PC 2160 (1520, and continues to develop leadership, Officership skills, self-awareness, and critical thinking skills through challenging scenarios related to small-unit tactical operations. Cadets receive systematic and specific feedback on their leadership values, attributes, skills, and actions. Prerequisites: MS-PC 1210, 1230, 2150, and 2160 [3]

MS-PC3120 - Applied Team LeadershipChallenging scenarios related to small-unit tactical operations are used to develop self-awareness and critical thinking skills. Cadets receive systematic and specific feedback on their leadership values, attributes, skills, and actions. Open to ROTC Cadets only. Prerequisite: MS 211. [3]

MS-PC3850 - Independent Study in Military ScienceIndividual study of selected topics or research in the Military Science Department. Consent of supervising faculty member required. May be repeated. [1-3]

MS-PC4150 - Leadership and EthicsStudents develops proficiency in planning, executing, and assessing complex operations, functioning as a member of a staff, and providing leadership-performance feedback to subordinates. Students are given situational opportunities to assess risk, make sound ethical decisions, and provide coaching and mentoring to fellow ROTC Cadets. Open to ROTC Cadets only. [3]

MS-PC4160 - Leadership in a Complex WorldThis course explores the dynamics of leading in the complex situations of current military operations in the contemporary operating environment. It introduces the concept of culture, its components, how culture influences human behavior, the impact of culturally influenced behavior on military operations, and how to analyze and apply cultural considerations in the planning and execution of military operations. Open to ROTCCadets only. Prerequisite: MS-PC 4150. [3]

MENT1120 - The Business of MusicA general survey of music in the world of commerce. Systems of the contemporary music business, with special emphasis on the recording industry. Music business professionals as guest lecturers. FALL, SPRING. [3] Porter.

MENT1130 - Building Communities through Music and the ArtsThe philosophical and strategic background for and practical skills in audience-focused and audience-engaged arts programming. Techniques to make music both accessible and relevant to learners; development ofinteractive programs and curriculum-directed programs; form, structure, and pacing of programs, including repertoire selection and duration, presentation of music, and participatory experiences. FALL [1] Korn.

MENT1135 - Arts Administration: Best Practices and Careers in the Arts Organization MarketplaceA study of best practices and development of marketable skills in arts administration. Investigation of arts administration employment opportunities, roles and responsibilities in executive leadership, finances, fundraising, artistic leadership, education, organizational development, and marketing and media. Leading arts institutions are studied as models for arts administration careers and professional advancement. Guest artist administrators will further class discussion and real world application. [1]

MENT1140 - Creating Funding and Non-Profit Vehicles for 21st Century Community ServiceStrategies for planning, financing, supporting, and sustaining an artistic and social development mission.Specific tools for creating mission-driven music, arts and community service organizational structures. SPRING.[2] Korn.

MENT2100 - Career Preparedness: The Business of a Music ProfessionalPrepares students for a career in music and its related fields. Emphasis on essential skills for building a portfoliio, leveraging digital content online, fiscal management, interviewing/auditioning, audience engagement, basic marketing/branding, copyright/ownership, career adaptability, and developing an artistic vision. Course will be led by a rotation of faculty.MENT3110 - 21st Century Artistry: Advanced Skills in Live Performance, Technology andCommunicationCourse DescriptionSkills for artistry, employment, audience engagement, communications, and the business of live music performance and recording. Emphasis on live and recorded stage and communication presentation; utilization of laptops as recording and live technologies; and creative application of technology, creativity, advocacy and business skills for employment. Prerequisite: MUTH 2400 or permission of instructor.MENT3880 - Music Internship (1 credit)Course DescriptionAcademic research and writing related to a co-requisite internship experience under the direction of a faculty sponsor. Prerequisite: 2.9 GPA, sophomore standing, and approval of project prospectus by faculty sponsor and by Associate Dean. May be repeated for credit, up to 1 credit per semester of enrollment. FALL, SPRING. [1].

CommunicationSkills for artistry, employment, audience engagement, communications, and the business of live music performance and recording. Emphasis on live and recorded stage and communication presentation; utilization of laptops as recording and live technologies; and creative application of technology, creativity, advocacy and business skills for employment. Prerequisite: MUTH 2400 or permission of instructor.MENT3880 - Music Internship (1 credit)Course DescriptionAcademic research and writing related to a co-requisite internship experience under the direction of a faculty sponsor. Prerequisite: 2.9 GPA, sophomore standing, and approval of project prospectus by faculty sponsor and by Associate Dean. May be repeated for credit, up to 1 credit per semester of enrollment. FALL, SPRING. [1].

MENT3880 - Music Internship (1 credit)Academic research and writing related to a co-requisite internship experience under the direction of a faculty sponsor. Prerequisite: 2.9 GPA, sophomore standing, and approval of project prospectus by faculty sponsor and by Associate Dean. May be repeated for credit, up to 1 credit per semester of enrollment. FALL, SPRING. [1].

MENT3881 - Music Internship (3 credits)An extensive academic program of study related to a co-requisite internship experience under the direction of a faculty sponsor. Prerequisite: 2.9 GPA, sophomore standing, and approval of project prospectus by faculty sponsor and by Associate Dean. May be repeated for credit, up to 3 credits per semester of enrollment. FALL, SPRING, SUMMER. [3].

MENT3882 - Summer Music InternshipAcademic research and writing related to a co-requisite internship experience under the direction of a faculty sponsor. Prerequisite: 2.9 GPA, sophomore standing, and approval of project prospectus by faculty sponsor and by Associate Dean. Offered on a pass/fail basis only. May be repeated for credit, up to 1 credit per semester of enrollment. SUMMER. [1].

COMP1000 - Composition Studio ClassWeekly observation and participation. Required of all composition majors, including musical arts and integrated studies. Offered on a pass/fail basis. [0] Slayton, Link, Kurek, Michael Rose.

COMP1100 - Composition WorkshopCollaborative workshop specifically designed for non-composition majors and/or non-music majors. Includes introduction to compositional techniques, study of composers and their works, principles of scoring and the study of notation, including experimental types. Prerequisite or Corequisite: MUTH 1210 or MUTH 2200.COMP1150 - Composition (Elective/Minor/Concentration)Course DescriptionIndividual instruction and seminars. A variety of media, styles, and forms. Electronic and experimental techniques. Prerequisite: COMP 1100 and/or departmental approval. [Variable credit: 1-3 each semester]

COMP1150 - Composition (Elective/Minor/Concentration)Individual instruction and seminars. A variety of media, styles, and forms. Electronic and experimental techniques. Prerequisite: COMP 1100 and/or departmental approval. [Variable credit: 1-3 each semester]

COMP2100 - Intermediate Composition (B.Mus.Arts and Integrated Studies First-Years/Sophomores)Individual instruction and seminars. A variety of media, styles, and forms. Electronic and experimental techniques. Open only to B.Mus.Arts and integrated studies composition majors. [2]

COMP2301 - Intermediate Composition I (Composition Majors Freshmen/Sophomores)Individual instruction and seminar. A variety of media, styles, and forms. Electronic and experimental techniques. Open only to composition majors; instructor as assigned. [2] Link, Michael Rose, Slayton.

COMP2302 - Intermediate Composition II (Composition Majors Freshmen/Sophomores)Individual instruction and seminar. A variety of media, styles, and forms. Electronic and experimental techniques. Open only to composition majors; instructor as assigned. Prerequisite: COMP 2301. [2] Link, Michael Rose, Slayton.

COMP2303 - Intermediate Composition III (Composition Majors Freshmen/Sophomores)Individual instruction and seminar. A variety of media, styles, and forms. Electronic and experimental techniques. Open only to composition majors; instructor as assigned. Prerequisite: COMP 2302.COMP2304 - Intermediate Composition IV (Composition Majors Freshmen/Sophomores)Course DescriptionIndividual instruction and seminar. A variety of media, styles, and forms. Electronic and experimental techniques. Open only to composition majors; instructor as assigned. Prerequisite: COMP 2303. [3] Link, Michael Rose, Slayton.

COMP2304 - Intermediate Composition IV (Composition Majors Freshmen/Sophomores)Individual instruction and seminar. A variety of media, styles, and forms. Electronic and experimental techniques. Open only to composition majors; instructor as assigned. Prerequisite: COMP 2303. [3] Link, Michael Rose, Slayton.

COMP3978 - Junior ThesisCompletion of an extended paper based upon musical analysis. Open only to composition majors. Topic subject to approval. Progress monitored via tutorials. Completion of Junior Thesis is a pre-requisite for COMP 4970 and COMP 4303. [1] Kurek, Link, Michael Rose, Slayton.

COMP4100 - Advanced Composition (B.Mus.Arts and Integrated Studies Juniors/Seniors)Individual instruction and seminars. A variety of media, styles, and forms. Electronic and experimental techniques. Only open to B.Mus.Arts and Integrated Studies Juniors/Seniors.COMP4301 - Advanced Composition I (Composition Majors Juniors/Seniors)Course DescriptionContinuation of 2301-2304. Open only to composition majors. A 4th credit may be elected with instructor approval for focused opportunities such as analysis, repertoire study, etc. Prerequisite: COMP 2304. [3-4 each semester] Link, Michael Rose, Slayton.

COMP4301 - Advanced Composition I (Composition Majors Juniors/Seniors)Continuation of 2301-2304. Open only to composition majors. A 4th credit may be elected with instructor approval for focused opportunities such as analysis, repertoire study, etc. Prerequisite: COMP 2304. [3-4 each semester] Link, Michael Rose, Slayton.

COMP4302 - Advanced Composition II (Composition Majors Juniors/Seniors)Continuation of 2301-2304. Open only to composition/theory majors. A 4th credit may be elected with instructor approval for focused opportunities such as analysis, repertoire study, etc. Prerequisite: COMP 4301. [3-4 each semester] Link, Michael Rose, Slayton.

COMP4303 - Advanced Composition III (Composition Majors Juniors/Seniors)Continuation of 2301-2304. Open only to composition/theory majors. A 4th credit may be elected with instructor approval for focused opportunities such as analysis, repertoire study, etc. Prerequisite: COMP 4302, COMP 3978.[3-4 each semester] Link, Michael Rose, Slayton.

COMP4304 - Advanced Composition IV (Composition Majors Juniors/Seniors)Continuation of 2301-2304. Open only to composition majors. A 4th credit may be elected with instructor approval for focused opportunities such as analysis, repertoire study, etc. Prerequisite: COMP 4303. [3-4 each semester] Link, Michael Rose, Slayton.

COMP4970 - Senior Composition RecitalPlanning, rehearsing, and performing in a concert devoted solely to a student's own work. Open only to composition majors. Corequisite: COMP 4303. [1] Kurek, Link, Michael Rose, Slayton.

MPED3110 - Piano PedagogyPrinciples and procedures of teaching piano. Individual and group instruction techniques observed and discussed. Practicum with private students. Designed for B.Mus. and B.Mus.Arts piano majors. Permission of instructor required. FALL. [2] (Offered alternate years)

MPED3120 - Suzuki Violin PedagogyPrinciples and procedures of teaching violin using the Suzuki Violin School, books 1-4. Individual and group instruction techniques observed and discussed. Designed for junior or senior violin/viola students. Violin for class use required. Open by consent of instructor. FALL [3] (Offered alternate years)

MPED3121 - Suzuki Violin PedagogyPrinciples and procedures of teaching violin using the Suzuki Violin School, books 1-4. Individual and group instruction techniques observed and discussed. Designed for junior or senior violin/viola students. Violin for class use required. Open by consent of instructor. Prerequisite: MPED 3120. SPRING [3] (Offered alternate years) MPED3125 - Violin/Viola Pedagogy

Principles and procedures of teaching violin using the Suzuki Violin School, books 1-4. Individual and group instruction techniques observed and discussed. Designed for junior or senior violin/viola students. Violin for class use required. Open by consent of instructor. Prerequisite: MPED 3120. SPRING [3] (Offered alternate years) MPED3125 - Violin/Viola PedagogyPrinciples and procedures of teaching violin and viola. Emphasis on pedagogical literature and specific teaching techniques. Practicum with private students. Prerequisite: B.Mus. and B.Mus.Arts students with completion of four semesters of 2100 or 2200 in violin or viola. [2]

MPED3127 - Cello PedagogyEarly cello pedagogy, with strong emphasis on the major pedagogical influences of Suzuki. Prerequisite: B.Mus.and B.Mus.Arts students with completion of four semesters of CLLO 2100 or 2200.MPED3128 - Harp PedagogyCourse DescriptionPrinciples and procedures of teaching harp. Emphasis on pedagogical literature and specific teaching techniques. Prerequisite: B.Mus. and B.Mus.Arts students with completion of 4 semesters of HARP 2100 or 2200, or permission of instructor. FALLMPED3129 - Bass PedagogyCourse DescriptionPrinciples and procedures of teaching bass. Emphasis on pedagogical literature and specific teaching techniques. Practicum with private students. Prerequisite: B.Mus. and B.Mus.Arts students with completion of four semesters of BASS 2100 or BASS 2200.MPED3130 - Vocal PedagogyCourse DescriptionPrinciples and procedures of teaching voice. Psychological and physiological approaches. Practicum with private students. Corequisite: VOIC 4100 or VOIC 4200 FALL. [2]

MPED3128 - Harp PedagogyPrinciples and procedures of teaching harp. Emphasis on pedagogical literature and specific teaching techniques. Prerequisite: B.Mus. and B.Mus.Arts students with completion of 4 semesters of HARP 2100 or 2200, or permission of instructor. FALLMPED3129 - Bass PedagogyCourse DescriptionPrinciples and procedures of teaching bass. Emphasis on pedagogical literature and specific teaching techniques. Practicum with private students. Prerequisite: B.Mus. and B.Mus.Arts students with completion of four semesters of BASS 2100 or BASS 2200.MPED3130 - Vocal PedagogyCourse DescriptionPrinciples and procedures of teaching voice. Psychological and physiological approaches. Practicum with private students. Corequisite: VOIC 4100 or VOIC 4200 FALL. [2]

MPED3129 - Bass PedagogyPrinciples and procedures of teaching bass. Emphasis on pedagogical literature and specific teaching techniques. Practicum with private students. Prerequisite: B.Mus. and B.Mus.Arts students with completion of four semesters of BASS 2100 or BASS 2200.MPED3130 - Vocal PedagogyCourse DescriptionPrinciples and procedures of teaching voice. Psychological and physiological approaches. Practicum with private students. Corequisite: VOIC 4100 or VOIC 4200 FALL. [2]

MPED3130 - Vocal PedagogyPrinciples and procedures of teaching voice. Psychological and physiological approaches. Practicum with private students. Corequisite: VOIC 4100 or VOIC 4200 FALL. [2]

MPED3140 - Woodwind PedagogyPrinciples and procedures of teaching woodwind instruments. Emphasis on pedagogical literature and specific teaching techniques. Prerequisite: B.Mus. and B.Mus.Arts students with completion of four semesters of 2100 or 2200 in major instrument, or permission of instructor. [2]

MPED3142 - Brass PedagogyPrinciples and procedures of teaching brass instruments. Emphasis on pedagogical literature and specific teaching techniques. Prerequisite: B.Mus. and B.Mus.Arts students with completion of two semesters of 2100 or 2200 in a brass instrument, or permission of instructor. Fall. [2]

MPED3144 - Percussion PedagogyPrinciples and procedures of teaching percussion instruments. Emphasis on pedagogical literature and specific teaching techniques. Prerequisite: B.Mus. and B.Mus.Arts students with completion of four semesters of PERC2100 or 2200.MPED3870 - Pedagogy PracticumCourse DescriptionPrinciples and procedures of private teaching. Reading and research under the direction of a faculty sponsor, consistent with requirements for Independent Study. Practicum with private students. Consent of the faculty sponsor is required. Repeatable for credit, variable 1-2 hours each semester. [1-2] Staff.

MPED3870 - Pedagogy PracticumPrinciples and procedures of private teaching. Reading and research under the direction of a faculty sponsor, consistent with requirements for Independent Study. Practicum with private students. Consent of the faculty sponsor is required. Repeatable for credit, variable 1-2 hours each semester. [1-2] Staff.

MPED3880 - Pedagogy InternshipFocused experience in the teaching of performance under the direction of a faculty sponsor in that performance area (consent required). Involves a specific program of regular consultation between student and supervising teacher. Open only to students seeking concentration in pedagogy. Prerequisite: MREP 3310 or 3311, 3300, 3330, or MUSO 3850 (in field) and MPED 3110, 3100, or 3130 or MUSO 3850 (in field). [Repeatable for credit, variable 1-3 hours each semester.] Staff.

MREP2110 - Brass Orchestral RepertoireExploration of the standard orchestral repertoire with emphasis on the late Romantic period. Performance of selected excerpts, coached and conducted. May be repeated for credit.MREP2120 - Orchestral Repertoire for PercussionCourse DescriptionExploration of the standard orchestral repertoire for percussion instruments, exclusive of timpani, with emphasis on score analysis, instrument selection, and performance techniques. Selected excerpts coached andconducted.MREP2121 - Orchestral Repertoire for TimpaniCourse DescriptionExploration of the standard orchestral repertoire for timpani. Emphasis on score analysis, editing, stick selection, and performance practice. Selected excerpts coached and conducted.MREP2130 - String and Harp Orchestral RepertoireCourse DescriptionAnalysis and coaching of the standard orchestral repertoire, including opera and ballet, with emphasis on style and technical problems. Selected excerpts in like instrument groups (violin, viola, cello, bass, harp). May be repeated for credit.MREP2140 - Woodwind Orchestral RepertoireCourse DescriptionExploration of the standard orchestral repertoire with emphasis on performance practice. Performance of selected excerpts, coached and conducted. Not recommended for first-year students. May be repeated for credit.MREP2141 - Saxophone Orchestral and Wind Band RepertoireCourse DescriptionExploration of the standard orchestral and wind band repertoire with emphasis on performance practice.Performance of selected excerpts, coached and conducted. Not recommended for freshmen. Prerequisite: B.Mus. and B.Mus.Arts students or permission of instructor. [1]

MREP2120 - Orchestral Repertoire for PercussionExploration of the standard orchestral repertoire for percussion instruments, exclusive of timpani, with emphasis on score analysis, instrument selection, and performance techniques. Selected excerpts coached andconducted.MREP2121 - Orchestral Repertoire for TimpaniCourse DescriptionExploration of the standard orchestral repertoire for timpani. Emphasis on score analysis, editing, stick selection, and performance practice. Selected excerpts coached and conducted.MREP2130 - String and Harp Orchestral RepertoireCourse DescriptionAnalysis and coaching of the standard orchestral repertoire, including opera and ballet, with emphasis on style and technical problems. Selected excerpts in like instrument groups (violin, viola, cello, bass, harp). May be repeated for credit.MREP2140 - Woodwind Orchestral RepertoireCourse DescriptionExploration of the standard orchestral repertoire with emphasis on performance practice. Performance of selected excerpts, coached and conducted. Not recommended for first-year students. May be repeated for credit.MREP2141 - Saxophone Orchestral and Wind Band RepertoireCourse DescriptionExploration of the standard orchestral and wind band repertoire with emphasis on performance practice.Performance of selected excerpts, coached and conducted. Not recommended for freshmen. Prerequisite: B.Mus. and B.Mus.Arts students or permission of instructor. [1]

MREP2121 - Orchestral Repertoire for TimpaniExploration of the standard orchestral repertoire for timpani. Emphasis on score analysis, editing, stick selection, and performance practice. Selected excerpts coached and conducted.MREP2130 - String and Harp Orchestral RepertoireCourse DescriptionAnalysis and coaching of the standard orchestral repertoire, including opera and ballet, with emphasis on style and technical problems. Selected excerpts in like instrument groups (violin, viola, cello, bass, harp). May be repeated for credit.MREP2140 - Woodwind Orchestral RepertoireCourse DescriptionExploration of the standard orchestral repertoire with emphasis on performance practice. Performance of selected excerpts, coached and conducted. Not recommended for first-year students. May be repeated for credit.MREP2141 - Saxophone Orchestral and Wind Band RepertoireCourse DescriptionExploration of the standard orchestral and wind band repertoire with emphasis on performance practice.Performance of selected excerpts, coached and conducted. Not recommended for freshmen. Prerequisite: B.Mus. and B.Mus.Arts students or permission of instructor. [1]

MREP2130 - String and Harp Orchestral RepertoireAnalysis and coaching of the standard orchestral repertoire, including opera and ballet, with emphasis on style and technical problems. Selected excerpts in like instrument groups (violin, viola, cello, bass, harp). May be repeated for credit.MREP2140 - Woodwind Orchestral RepertoireCourse DescriptionExploration of the standard orchestral repertoire with emphasis on performance practice. Performance of selected excerpts, coached and conducted. Not recommended for first-year students. May be repeated for credit.MREP2141 - Saxophone Orchestral and Wind Band RepertoireCourse DescriptionExploration of the standard orchestral and wind band repertoire with emphasis on performance practice.Performance of selected excerpts, coached and conducted. Not recommended for freshmen. Prerequisite: B.Mus. and B.Mus.Arts students or permission of instructor. [1]

MREP2140 - Woodwind Orchestral RepertoireExploration of the standard orchestral repertoire with emphasis on performance practice. Performance of selected excerpts, coached and conducted. Not recommended for first-year students. May be repeated for credit.MREP2141 - Saxophone Orchestral and Wind Band RepertoireCourse DescriptionExploration of the standard orchestral and wind band repertoire with emphasis on performance practice.Performance of selected excerpts, coached and conducted. Not recommended for freshmen. Prerequisite: B.Mus. and B.Mus.Arts students or permission of instructor. [1]

MREP2141 - Saxophone Orchestral and Wind Band RepertoireExploration of the standard orchestral and wind band repertoire with emphasis on performance practice.Performance of selected excerpts, coached and conducted. Not recommended for freshmen. Prerequisite: B.Mus. and B.Mus.Arts students or permission of instructor. [1]

MREP2150 - Survey of Orchestral Repertory: From Monteverdi to the Dawn of ModernismA course which exposes student musicians to a broad selection of important works from 1624-1934 (with occasional vocal or chamber pieces for added context), with an emphasis on their basic musical features and cultural importance. Composers examined include Vivaldi, Bach, Haydn, Mozart, Beethoven, Schubert,Tchaikovsky, Mahler, Stravinsky, Dawson, Barber, and Crawford Seeger.MREP3310 - Piano Literature ICourse DescriptionA survey of works for piano from the seventeenth through the nineteenth centuries, within the context of historical perspective, stylistic awareness, and pianism. Designed primarily for piano majors.MREP3311 - Piano Literature IICourse DescriptionA survey of works for piano from the nineteenth through the twenty-first centuries, within the context of historical perspective, stylistic awareness, and pianism. Designed primarily for piano majors.MREP3330 - Vocal LiteratureCourse DescriptionSurvey of literature for solo voice from the seventeenth century to the present, with focus on traditional art songs of the great masters of the genre. Prerequisite: MUTH 2300, MUSL 2200W. Corequisite: VOIC 4100 or VOIC4200.Music Teacher EducationMUED1010 - Woodwind MethodsCourse DescriptionDevelopment of performance skills and teaching methods for flute, clarinet, oboe, bassoon, and saxophone.Includes teaching techniques and problems relative to woodwind instruments, care and minor repairs, and instructional materials. Open only to B.Mus. students; or permission of instructor. FALL. [1] Utley.

MREP3310 - Piano Literature IA survey of works for piano from the seventeenth through the nineteenth centuries, within the context of historical perspective, stylistic awareness, and pianism. Designed primarily for piano majors.MREP3311 - Piano Literature IICourse DescriptionA survey of works for piano from the nineteenth through the twenty-first centuries, within the context of historical perspective, stylistic awareness, and pianism. Designed primarily for piano majors.MREP3330 - Vocal LiteratureCourse DescriptionSurvey of literature for solo voice from the seventeenth century to the present, with focus on traditional art songs of the great masters of the genre. Prerequisite: MUTH 2300, MUSL 2200W. Corequisite: VOIC 4100 or VOIC4200.Music Teacher EducationMUED1010 - Woodwind MethodsCourse DescriptionDevelopment of performance skills and teaching methods for flute, clarinet, oboe, bassoon, and saxophone.Includes teaching techniques and problems relative to woodwind instruments, care and minor repairs, and instructional materials. Open only to B.Mus. students; or permission of instructor. FALL. [1] Utley.

MREP3311 - Piano Literature IIA survey of works for piano from the nineteenth through the twenty-first centuries, within the context of historical perspective, stylistic awareness, and pianism. Designed primarily for piano majors.MREP3330 - Vocal LiteratureCourse DescriptionSurvey of literature for solo voice from the seventeenth century to the present, with focus on traditional art songs of the great masters of the genre. Prerequisite: MUTH 2300, MUSL 2200W. Corequisite: VOIC 4100 or VOIC4200.Music Teacher EducationMUED1010 - Woodwind MethodsCourse DescriptionDevelopment of performance skills and teaching methods for flute, clarinet, oboe, bassoon, and saxophone.Includes teaching techniques and problems relative to woodwind instruments, care and minor repairs, and instructional materials. Open only to B.Mus. students; or permission of instructor. FALL. [1] Utley.

MREP3330 - Vocal LiteratureSurvey of literature for solo voice from the seventeenth century to the present, with focus on traditional art songs of the great masters of the genre. Prerequisite: MUTH 2300, MUSL 2200W. Corequisite: VOIC 4100 or VOIC4200.Music Teacher EducationMUED1010 - Woodwind MethodsCourse DescriptionDevelopment of performance skills and teaching methods for flute, clarinet, oboe, bassoon, and saxophone.Includes teaching techniques and problems relative to woodwind instruments, care and minor repairs, and instructional materials. Open only to B.Mus. students; or permission of instructor. FALL. [1] Utley.

MUED1010 - Woodwind MethodsDevelopment of performance skills and teaching methods for flute, clarinet, oboe, bassoon, and saxophone.Includes teaching techniques and problems relative to woodwind instruments, care and minor repairs, and instructional materials. Open only to B.Mus. students; or permission of instructor. FALL. [1] Utley.

MUED1020 - Brass MethodsDevelopment of performance skills and teaching methods for trumpet, french horn, trombone, euphonium, and tuba. Includes teaching techniques and problems relative to brass instruments, care and minor repairs, and instructional materials. Open only to B.Mus. students; or permission of instructor. SPRING. [1]

MUED1030 - Strings MethodsDevelopment of performance skills and teaching methods for violin, viola, cello, and double bass. Includes teaching techniques and problems relative to string instruments, care and minor repairs, and instructional materials. Open only to B.Mus. students; or permission of instructor. FALL. [1] Bingham.

MUED1040 - Percussion MethodsDevelopment of performance skills and teaching methods for snare drum, timpani, mallet instruments, and other percussion instruments. Includes teaching techniques and problems relative to all percussion instruments, care and minor repairs, and instructional materials. Open only to B.Mus. students; or permission of instructor.FALL. [1] Vinson.

MUED1080 - Piano Skills for the Music EducatorFocused study in score reading, sight reading, and collaborative techniques to prepare for classroom teaching.Includes vocal and instrumental repertoire. [1]

MUED2100 - Introduction to Music Education{Previously MUED 2010} Focus on lesson planning, proper teaching sequences, observation techniques,classroom instruments, and verbal/non-verbal instruction. First in a sequence of three methods-based courses in teaching music. Open to all B.Mus. students. [3] T. Biddlecombe

MUED2110 - Seminar in Choral Literature and ArrangingTeaching techniques, knowledge of choral repertoire, and arranging skills as applicable to K-12 choral programs.Tonal, harmonic, and melodic analysis, score marking and preparation, revoicing, and classroom concerns.Repertoire drawn from the American Choral Directors Association reading lists, All-State honor choir lists, and other applicable sources to encompass a broad range of genres, styles, levels of difficulty, ethnicities, and musical periods. Prerequisite: MUTH 2200 and approval of instructor. SPRING. [3] M. Biddlecombe. (Offered alternate years)

MUED2120 - Seminar in Teaching OrchestraInstructional strategies for string and full orchestras from the middle school through high school and youth orchestra levels. Topics to include rehearsal techniques, repertoire, materials, secondary string class instruction, and performance practices. Prerequisite: MUED 1030 and MCON 3000, or permission of instructor. SPRING. [2]

MUED2130 - Seminar in Orff/Kod√°ly MethodsTeaching general music with emphasis on Orff and Kod√°ly principles and practices. Planning, instruction, and evaluation using techniques and materials from a variety of sources. FALL. [2] Ramsey. (Offered alternate years)

MUED2140 - Seminar in Teaching Jazz StylesPrinciples and practices for teaching instrumental jazz styles. Rehearsal techniques (including observation), repertoire, jazz education philosophies, and stylistic elements for soloists, combos, and larger ensembles. MUED2140 satisfies pedagogy requirement for Jazz Studies Majors. Prerequisite: MUSO 1220 or permission of instructor. SPRING. [2] Middagh.

MUED2150 - Seminar in Teaching Marching BandTechniques and materials for Marching Band instruction. Organization, administration, literature, technology, auxiliary groups. Planning, writing, arranging and teaching halftime performances. Prerequisite or corequisite: MCON 3000 or permission of instructor; corequisite: participation in marching band. FALL. [2]

MUED2180 - Seminar in Inclusive Inquiry in Music EducationA focus on leading future music educators through a process of reflection on marginalized peoples, practices in the field of music education that lead to marginalization, and strategies for improved and increased inclusion in school music programs. To this end, a critical lens will be used to examine the culture, norms, traditions, and practices inherent in American music education. [2]

MUED3010 - Intermediate Instrumental Methods and MaterialsTopics include applied teaching techniques, primary and early secondary band/orchestra literature, and lesson planning. Second in a sequence of three methods-based courses in teaching music. Prerequisite: MUED 2100(previously listed as 2010). [2]

MUED3020 - Intermediate Choral Methods and MaterialsTopics include rote teaching, primary and early secondary choral literature, vocal modeling, intermediate sequencing, and solfege implementation. Second in a sequence of three methods-based courses in teaching music. Prerequisite: MUED 2100 (previously listed as 2010). [2]

MUED3870 - Practicum in Music TeachingObservation, participation, and supervised music teaching in a variety of school, grade level, and instructional music settings, designed to integrate and apply musical knowledge and teaching skills developed within the degree program. Weekly seminar included. Includes SMART music studio technology and GarageBandtechnology. SPRING. [1]

MUED3871 - Practicum in Music Teaching IIObservation, participation, and supervised music teaching in a variety of school, grade level, and instructional music settings, designed to integrate and apply musical knowledge and teaching skills developed within the degree program. Weekly seminar included. Prerequisite: MUED 3870. SPRING. [1]

MUED3872 - Practicum in Music Teaching IIIObservation, participation, and supervised music teaching in a variety of school, grade level, and instructional music settings, designed to integrate and apply musical knowledge and teaching skills developed within the degree program. Weekly seminar included. Prerequisite: MUED 3871 and any two from MUED 2110-2170.SPRING. [1]

MUED3880 - Experiential Instruction in Music IField-based experience with a precollege ensemble or university band organization. Experience will include classroom preparation, leading sectionals or portions of rehearsals, and/or other appropriate activities as assigned by the lead teacher. Attendance at culminating performance is required. [.5] Biddlecombe.

MUED3881 - Experiential Instruction in Music IIField-based experience with a precollege ensemble or university band organization. Experience will include classroom preparation, leading sectionals, leading portions of rehearsals, and/or other appropriate activities as assigned by the lead teacher. [.5]

MUED3882 - Experiential Instruction in Music IIIField-based experience with a precollege ensemble or university band organization. Experience will include classroom preparation, leading sectionals or portions of rehearsals, and/or other appropriate activities as assigned by the lead teacher. Attendance at culminating performance is required. [1]

MUTH1111 - First-Year Writing Seminar - Music in FictionConsiders meanings of music in contemporary fiction by way of representative music and literature. Includes consideration of classical, jazz, hip-hop, and popular music in short stories and novels. Familiarity with musical notation is expected.MUTH1135 - MozartCourse DescriptionThe music of Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart. Techniques for listening to different genres of classical music.Emphasis on style and structure, music theory and history, and Mozart's life and character. No musical background assumed. Does not count toward major or minor in music. SPRING. [3]

MUTH1135 - MozartThe music of Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart. Techniques for listening to different genres of classical music.Emphasis on style and structure, music theory and history, and Mozart's life and character. No musical background assumed. Does not count toward major or minor in music. SPRING. [3]

MUTH1200 - Survey of Music TheoryPresents 18th- to 20th-century harmonic practice. Designed to develop music theory skills through written exercises of figured and unfigured basses; harmonization of melodies; and study of ear training, using sightsinging exercises and melodic and harmonic dictation. Not open to students who have completed MUTH 2100 or 2200. Does not count toward a major in music. [3] Bingham.

MUTH1210 - Survey of Music TheoryPresents 18th- to 20th-century harmonic practice. Designed to develop music theory skills through written exercises of figured and unfigured basses; harmonization of melodies; and study of ear training, using sightsinging exercises and melodic and harmonic dictation. Prerequisite: MUTH 1200. Not open to students who have completed MUTH 2100 or 2200. Does not count toward a major in music. [3] Bingham.

MUTH2100 - The Syntax of MusicBasic elements of music and notation (including computer notation), introduced through a wide variety of styles.Includes non-tonal and non-Western repertoire. Reinforcement of the elements of MUTH 2110/Aural Skills Level I throughout. B.Mus. and B.Mus.Arts students enrolled in MUTH 2100 should also be enrolled in MUSO 1340.Corequisite: MUTH 2110. FALL. [2]

MUTH2110 - Aural Skills in Tonal Practice (I)Study via guided improvisation, lecture, performance, and notation exercises: intervals, modes, triads, dominant seventh chords, diatonic tonality, major and minor keys and degree function, various systems of solfege and number, harmonization, notation and performance of simple rhythmic textures. Corequisite: MUTH2100. FALL [1]

MUTH2200 - Harmonic Idioms of the Common Practice PeriodPrinciples of harmonic progression in the context of music from the common practice period. Includes figured bass realization, harmonization, analysis, composition, contrapuntal idioms, modulation. Prerequisite: B- or above in MUTH 2100; corequisite: MUTH 2220.MUTH2220 - Aural Skills in Tonal Practice (II)Course DescriptionStudy via guided improvisation, lecture, performance, and dictation: chromatic function in melody, inversion, seventh chords, tonicization and modulation, common chromatic substitutions, transposition, hearing form, notation and performance of complex rhythmic textures. Prerequisite: MUTH 2110; corequisite: MUTH 2200.MUTH2300 - Musical Expansions: the Twentieth Century to the PresentCourse DescriptionLate-Romantic, modernist, and postmodern compositional practices, including freely chromatic and non-functional harmony, ordered and unordered sets, post-tonal formal design, contemporary rhythmic devices, indeterminacy, and quotation. Prerequisite: C- or above in MUTH 2200; corequisite: MUTH 2330.MUTH2330 - Aural Skills in Non-Tonal PracticesCourse DescriptionStudy via sight-singing, dictation, score-reading, listening, improvisation, and lecture: 20th-century scale forms, modes of limited transposition, serialism, free atonality, common atonal trichords, notation and performance of advanced rhythmic textures. Prerequisite: MUTH 2220; corequisite: MUTH 2300.MUTH2400 - Elements of AnalysisCourse DescriptionA study of analytical concepts and methodologies applied to harmonic, rhythmic, and structural aspects of diverse musical practices and styles. Approaches to interpreting and creating musical meaning through listening and/or score study. Prerequisite: C- or above in MUTH 2300.MUTH2440 - Aural Skills & Performance ReadinessCourse DescriptionThe use of Aural Skills as a lens into practical performance psychology. A broad survey of readings for discussion, performance exercises with group feedback, private coachings, and journaling will offer participants a chance to discover their own optimal mindset for calm, dependable performance. Counts as a Semester 4Special Topics seminar in the Aural Skills core. Prerequisite: MUTH 2330.MUTH2441 - Aural Skills and the Choral ProfessionalCourse DescriptionApplication of Aural Skills to choral professionals: choral section leaders in church and symphony choruses, secondary and college-level choral conductors, etc. Focus on choral works of the 20th and 21st centuries, analysis, rhythmic exercises, rehearsal organization, and sight-singing skills critical for communication between conductor and choir. Counts as a Semester 4 Special Topics seminar in the Aural Skills core.MUTH2442 - Aural Skills in Application to Rehearsal, Teaching, and PerformanceCourse DescriptionApplication of Aural Skills to musical situations encountered outside of class: individual preparation, teaching, coaching, and ensemble skills in rehearsal and performance. Focus on Aural Skills as practice method, students'instrumental and/or vocal repertoire, solfège methods, pedagogy, and score-study for high level artistry in performance. Counts as a Semester 4 Special Topics seminar in the Aural Skills core.MUTH2443 - Advanced Fundamentals of Aural SkillsCourse DescriptionComprehensive review of skills studied in MUTH 2110, 2220, and 2330 with the goal of enhanced mastery. Focus on a fluency-based model to develop high levels of skill and real-time perception of rhythm, meter, intervals, chords, and harmony. Counts as a semester four special topics seminar in the Aural Skills core.MUTH3100 - Individual Theory Instruction (Elective)Course DescriptionIndividual instruction and seminars. Score analysis and style-study composition. Prerequisite: MUTH 2400 and consent of instructor. May be repeated for credit. [Variable credit: 1-3 each semester] Music theory faculty.

MUTH2220 - Aural Skills in Tonal Practice (II)Study via guided improvisation, lecture, performance, and dictation: chromatic function in melody, inversion, seventh chords, tonicization and modulation, common chromatic substitutions, transposition, hearing form, notation and performance of complex rhythmic textures. Prerequisite: MUTH 2110; corequisite: MUTH 2200.MUTH2300 - Musical Expansions: the Twentieth Century to the PresentCourse DescriptionLate-Romantic, modernist, and postmodern compositional practices, including freely chromatic and non-functional harmony, ordered and unordered sets, post-tonal formal design, contemporary rhythmic devices, indeterminacy, and quotation. Prerequisite: C- or above in MUTH 2200; corequisite: MUTH 2330.MUTH2330 - Aural Skills in Non-Tonal PracticesCourse DescriptionStudy via sight-singing, dictation, score-reading, listening, improvisation, and lecture: 20th-century scale forms, modes of limited transposition, serialism, free atonality, common atonal trichords, notation and performance of advanced rhythmic textures. Prerequisite: MUTH 2220; corequisite: MUTH 2300.MUTH2400 - Elements of AnalysisCourse DescriptionA study of analytical concepts and methodologies applied to harmonic, rhythmic, and structural aspects of diverse musical practices and styles. Approaches to interpreting and creating musical meaning through listening and/or score study. Prerequisite: C- or above in MUTH 2300.MUTH2440 - Aural Skills & Performance ReadinessCourse DescriptionThe use of Aural Skills as a lens into practical performance psychology. A broad survey of readings for discussion, performance exercises with group feedback, private coachings, and journaling will offer participants a chance to discover their own optimal mindset for calm, dependable performance. Counts as a Semester 4Special Topics seminar in the Aural Skills core. Prerequisite: MUTH 2330.MUTH2441 - Aural Skills and the Choral ProfessionalCourse DescriptionApplication of Aural Skills to choral professionals: choral section leaders in church and symphony choruses, secondary and college-level choral conductors, etc. Focus on choral works of the 20th and 21st centuries, analysis, rhythmic exercises, rehearsal organization, and sight-singing skills critical for communication between conductor and choir. Counts as a Semester 4 Special Topics seminar in the Aural Skills core.MUTH2442 - Aural Skills in Application to Rehearsal, Teaching, and PerformanceCourse DescriptionApplication of Aural Skills to musical situations encountered outside of class: individual preparation, teaching, coaching, and ensemble skills in rehearsal and performance. Focus on Aural Skills as practice method, students'instrumental and/or vocal repertoire, solfège methods, pedagogy, and score-study for high level artistry in performance. Counts as a Semester 4 Special Topics seminar in the Aural Skills core.MUTH2443 - Advanced Fundamentals of Aural SkillsCourse DescriptionComprehensive review of skills studied in MUTH 2110, 2220, and 2330 with the goal of enhanced mastery. Focus on a fluency-based model to develop high levels of skill and real-time perception of rhythm, meter, intervals, chords, and harmony. Counts as a semester four special topics seminar in the Aural Skills core.MUTH3100 - Individual Theory Instruction (Elective)Course DescriptionIndividual instruction and seminars. Score analysis and style-study composition. Prerequisite: MUTH 2400 and consent of instructor. May be repeated for credit. [Variable credit: 1-3 each semester] Music theory faculty.

MUTH2300 - Musical Expansions: the Twentieth Century to the PresentLate-Romantic, modernist, and postmodern compositional practices, including freely chromatic and non-functional harmony, ordered and unordered sets, post-tonal formal design, contemporary rhythmic devices, indeterminacy, and quotation. Prerequisite: C- or above in MUTH 2200; corequisite: MUTH 2330.MUTH2330 - Aural Skills in Non-Tonal PracticesCourse DescriptionStudy via sight-singing, dictation, score-reading, listening, improvisation, and lecture: 20th-century scale forms, modes of limited transposition, serialism, free atonality, common atonal trichords, notation and performance of advanced rhythmic textures. Prerequisite: MUTH 2220; corequisite: MUTH 2300.MUTH2400 - Elements of AnalysisCourse DescriptionA study of analytical concepts and methodologies applied to harmonic, rhythmic, and structural aspects of diverse musical practices and styles. Approaches to interpreting and creating musical meaning through listening and/or score study. Prerequisite: C- or above in MUTH 2300.MUTH2440 - Aural Skills & Performance ReadinessCourse DescriptionThe use of Aural Skills as a lens into practical performance psychology. A broad survey of readings for discussion, performance exercises with group feedback, private coachings, and journaling will offer participants a chance to discover their own optimal mindset for calm, dependable performance. Counts as a Semester 4Special Topics seminar in the Aural Skills core. Prerequisite: MUTH 2330.MUTH2441 - Aural Skills and the Choral ProfessionalCourse DescriptionApplication of Aural Skills to choral professionals: choral section leaders in church and symphony choruses, secondary and college-level choral conductors, etc. Focus on choral works of the 20th and 21st centuries, analysis, rhythmic exercises, rehearsal organization, and sight-singing skills critical for communication between conductor and choir. Counts as a Semester 4 Special Topics seminar in the Aural Skills core.MUTH2442 - Aural Skills in Application to Rehearsal, Teaching, and PerformanceCourse DescriptionApplication of Aural Skills to musical situations encountered outside of class: individual preparation, teaching, coaching, and ensemble skills in rehearsal and performance. Focus on Aural Skills as practice method, students'instrumental and/or vocal repertoire, solfège methods, pedagogy, and score-study for high level artistry in performance. Counts as a Semester 4 Special Topics seminar in the Aural Skills core.MUTH2443 - Advanced Fundamentals of Aural SkillsCourse DescriptionComprehensive review of skills studied in MUTH 2110, 2220, and 2330 with the goal of enhanced mastery. Focus on a fluency-based model to develop high levels of skill and real-time perception of rhythm, meter, intervals, chords, and harmony. Counts as a semester four special topics seminar in the Aural Skills core.MUTH3100 - Individual Theory Instruction (Elective)Course DescriptionIndividual instruction and seminars. Score analysis and style-study composition. Prerequisite: MUTH 2400 and consent of instructor. May be repeated for credit. [Variable credit: 1-3 each semester] Music theory faculty.

MUTH2330 - Aural Skills in Non-Tonal PracticesStudy via sight-singing, dictation, score-reading, listening, improvisation, and lecture: 20th-century scale forms, modes of limited transposition, serialism, free atonality, common atonal trichords, notation and performance of advanced rhythmic textures. Prerequisite: MUTH 2220; corequisite: MUTH 2300.MUTH2400 - Elements of AnalysisCourse DescriptionA study of analytical concepts and methodologies applied to harmonic, rhythmic, and structural aspects of diverse musical practices and styles. Approaches to interpreting and creating musical meaning through listening and/or score study. Prerequisite: C- or above in MUTH 2300.MUTH2440 - Aural Skills & Performance ReadinessCourse DescriptionThe use of Aural Skills as a lens into practical performance psychology. A broad survey of readings for discussion, performance exercises with group feedback, private coachings, and journaling will offer participants a chance to discover their own optimal mindset for calm, dependable performance. Counts as a Semester 4Special Topics seminar in the Aural Skills core. Prerequisite: MUTH 2330.MUTH2441 - Aural Skills and the Choral ProfessionalCourse DescriptionApplication of Aural Skills to choral professionals: choral section leaders in church and symphony choruses, secondary and college-level choral conductors, etc. Focus on choral works of the 20th and 21st centuries, analysis, rhythmic exercises, rehearsal organization, and sight-singing skills critical for communication between conductor and choir. Counts as a Semester 4 Special Topics seminar in the Aural Skills core.MUTH2442 - Aural Skills in Application to Rehearsal, Teaching, and PerformanceCourse DescriptionApplication of Aural Skills to musical situations encountered outside of class: individual preparation, teaching, coaching, and ensemble skills in rehearsal and performance. Focus on Aural Skills as practice method, students'instrumental and/or vocal repertoire, solfège methods, pedagogy, and score-study for high level artistry in performance. Counts as a Semester 4 Special Topics seminar in the Aural Skills core.MUTH2443 - Advanced Fundamentals of Aural SkillsCourse DescriptionComprehensive review of skills studied in MUTH 2110, 2220, and 2330 with the goal of enhanced mastery. Focus on a fluency-based model to develop high levels of skill and real-time perception of rhythm, meter, intervals, chords, and harmony. Counts as a semester four special topics seminar in the Aural Skills core.MUTH3100 - Individual Theory Instruction (Elective)Course DescriptionIndividual instruction and seminars. Score analysis and style-study composition. Prerequisite: MUTH 2400 and consent of instructor. May be repeated for credit. [Variable credit: 1-3 each semester] Music theory faculty.

MUTH2400 - Elements of AnalysisA study of analytical concepts and methodologies applied to harmonic, rhythmic, and structural aspects of diverse musical practices and styles. Approaches to interpreting and creating musical meaning through listening and/or score study. Prerequisite: C- or above in MUTH 2300.MUTH2440 - Aural Skills & Performance ReadinessCourse DescriptionThe use of Aural Skills as a lens into practical performance psychology. A broad survey of readings for discussion, performance exercises with group feedback, private coachings, and journaling will offer participants a chance to discover their own optimal mindset for calm, dependable performance. Counts as a Semester 4Special Topics seminar in the Aural Skills core. Prerequisite: MUTH 2330.MUTH2441 - Aural Skills and the Choral ProfessionalCourse DescriptionApplication of Aural Skills to choral professionals: choral section leaders in church and symphony choruses, secondary and college-level choral conductors, etc. Focus on choral works of the 20th and 21st centuries, analysis, rhythmic exercises, rehearsal organization, and sight-singing skills critical for communication between conductor and choir. Counts as a Semester 4 Special Topics seminar in the Aural Skills core.MUTH2442 - Aural Skills in Application to Rehearsal, Teaching, and PerformanceCourse DescriptionApplication of Aural Skills to musical situations encountered outside of class: individual preparation, teaching, coaching, and ensemble skills in rehearsal and performance. Focus on Aural Skills as practice method, students'instrumental and/or vocal repertoire, solfège methods, pedagogy, and score-study for high level artistry in performance. Counts as a Semester 4 Special Topics seminar in the Aural Skills core.MUTH2443 - Advanced Fundamentals of Aural SkillsCourse DescriptionComprehensive review of skills studied in MUTH 2110, 2220, and 2330 with the goal of enhanced mastery. Focus on a fluency-based model to develop high levels of skill and real-time perception of rhythm, meter, intervals, chords, and harmony. Counts as a semester four special topics seminar in the Aural Skills core.MUTH3100 - Individual Theory Instruction (Elective)Course DescriptionIndividual instruction and seminars. Score analysis and style-study composition. Prerequisite: MUTH 2400 and consent of instructor. May be repeated for credit. [Variable credit: 1-3 each semester] Music theory faculty.

MUTH2440 - Aural Skills & Performance ReadinessThe use of Aural Skills as a lens into practical performance psychology. A broad survey of readings for discussion, performance exercises with group feedback, private coachings, and journaling will offer participants a chance to discover their own optimal mindset for calm, dependable performance. Counts as a Semester 4Special Topics seminar in the Aural Skills core. Prerequisite: MUTH 2330.MUTH2441 - Aural Skills and the Choral ProfessionalCourse DescriptionApplication of Aural Skills to choral professionals: choral section leaders in church and symphony choruses, secondary and college-level choral conductors, etc. Focus on choral works of the 20th and 21st centuries, analysis, rhythmic exercises, rehearsal organization, and sight-singing skills critical for communication between conductor and choir. Counts as a Semester 4 Special Topics seminar in the Aural Skills core.MUTH2442 - Aural Skills in Application to Rehearsal, Teaching, and PerformanceCourse DescriptionApplication of Aural Skills to musical situations encountered outside of class: individual preparation, teaching, coaching, and ensemble skills in rehearsal and performance. Focus on Aural Skills as practice method, students'instrumental and/or vocal repertoire, solfège methods, pedagogy, and score-study for high level artistry in performance. Counts as a Semester 4 Special Topics seminar in the Aural Skills core.MUTH2443 - Advanced Fundamentals of Aural SkillsCourse DescriptionComprehensive review of skills studied in MUTH 2110, 2220, and 2330 with the goal of enhanced mastery. Focus on a fluency-based model to develop high levels of skill and real-time perception of rhythm, meter, intervals, chords, and harmony. Counts as a semester four special topics seminar in the Aural Skills core.MUTH3100 - Individual Theory Instruction (Elective)Course DescriptionIndividual instruction and seminars. Score analysis and style-study composition. Prerequisite: MUTH 2400 and consent of instructor. May be repeated for credit. [Variable credit: 1-3 each semester] Music theory faculty.

MUTH2441 - Aural Skills and the Choral ProfessionalApplication of Aural Skills to choral professionals: choral section leaders in church and symphony choruses, secondary and college-level choral conductors, etc. Focus on choral works of the 20th and 21st centuries, analysis, rhythmic exercises, rehearsal organization, and sight-singing skills critical for communication between conductor and choir. Counts as a Semester 4 Special Topics seminar in the Aural Skills core.MUTH2442 - Aural Skills in Application to Rehearsal, Teaching, and PerformanceCourse DescriptionApplication of Aural Skills to musical situations encountered outside of class: individual preparation, teaching, coaching, and ensemble skills in rehearsal and performance. Focus on Aural Skills as practice method, students'instrumental and/or vocal repertoire, solfège methods, pedagogy, and score-study for high level artistry in performance. Counts as a Semester 4 Special Topics seminar in the Aural Skills core.MUTH2443 - Advanced Fundamentals of Aural SkillsCourse DescriptionComprehensive review of skills studied in MUTH 2110, 2220, and 2330 with the goal of enhanced mastery. Focus on a fluency-based model to develop high levels of skill and real-time perception of rhythm, meter, intervals, chords, and harmony. Counts as a semester four special topics seminar in the Aural Skills core.MUTH3100 - Individual Theory Instruction (Elective)Course DescriptionIndividual instruction and seminars. Score analysis and style-study composition. Prerequisite: MUTH 2400 and consent of instructor. May be repeated for credit. [Variable credit: 1-3 each semester] Music theory faculty.

MUTH2442 - Aural Skills in Application to Rehearsal, Teaching, and PerformanceApplication of Aural Skills to musical situations encountered outside of class: individual preparation, teaching, coaching, and ensemble skills in rehearsal and performance. Focus on Aural Skills as practice method, students'instrumental and/or vocal repertoire, solfège methods, pedagogy, and score-study for high level artistry in performance. Counts as a Semester 4 Special Topics seminar in the Aural Skills core.MUTH2443 - Advanced Fundamentals of Aural SkillsCourse DescriptionComprehensive review of skills studied in MUTH 2110, 2220, and 2330 with the goal of enhanced mastery. Focus on a fluency-based model to develop high levels of skill and real-time perception of rhythm, meter, intervals, chords, and harmony. Counts as a semester four special topics seminar in the Aural Skills core.MUTH3100 - Individual Theory Instruction (Elective)Course DescriptionIndividual instruction and seminars. Score analysis and style-study composition. Prerequisite: MUTH 2400 and consent of instructor. May be repeated for credit. [Variable credit: 1-3 each semester] Music theory faculty.

MUTH2443 - Advanced Fundamentals of Aural SkillsComprehensive review of skills studied in MUTH 2110, 2220, and 2330 with the goal of enhanced mastery. Focus on a fluency-based model to develop high levels of skill and real-time perception of rhythm, meter, intervals, chords, and harmony. Counts as a semester four special topics seminar in the Aural Skills core.MUTH3100 - Individual Theory Instruction (Elective)Course DescriptionIndividual instruction and seminars. Score analysis and style-study composition. Prerequisite: MUTH 2400 and consent of instructor. May be repeated for credit. [Variable credit: 1-3 each semester] Music theory faculty.

MUTH3100 - Individual Theory Instruction (Elective)Individual instruction and seminars. Score analysis and style-study composition. Prerequisite: MUTH 2400 and consent of instructor. May be repeated for credit. [Variable credit: 1-3 each semester] Music theory faculty.

MUTH3110 - OrchestrationTechnical and aesthetic considerations in composing or transcribing for individual orchestral instruments, sections, and full orchestra. Score analysis and composition projects. Prerequisite: B- or above in MUTH 2100.MUTH3120 - Jazz TheoryCourse DescriptionAn exploration of harmonic syntax, melodic construction, and song forms in jazz. Includes analysis, directed listening, and practice hearing jazz chords and chord progressions. Prerequisite: MUTH 1210 or 2200.MUTH3130 - Techniques of Choral CompositionCourse DescriptionTechnical and aesthetic considerations involved in arranging and composing for combinations of voices, from two-part to larger choral ensembles, accompanied and unaccompanied. Score analysis and compositionprojects. Prerequisite: MUTH 2200 or consent of instructor. SPRING. [3] Carl Smith. (Offered alternate years) MUTH3140 - Historical Traditions in Composition and in Performance

MUTH3120 - Jazz TheoryAn exploration of harmonic syntax, melodic construction, and song forms in jazz. Includes analysis, directed listening, and practice hearing jazz chords and chord progressions. Prerequisite: MUTH 1210 or 2200.MUTH3130 - Techniques of Choral CompositionCourse DescriptionTechnical and aesthetic considerations involved in arranging and composing for combinations of voices, from two-part to larger choral ensembles, accompanied and unaccompanied. Score analysis and compositionprojects. Prerequisite: MUTH 2200 or consent of instructor. SPRING. [3] Carl Smith. (Offered alternate years) MUTH3140 - Historical Traditions in Composition and in Performance

MUTH3130 - Techniques of Choral CompositionTechnical and aesthetic considerations involved in arranging and composing for combinations of voices, from two-part to larger choral ensembles, accompanied and unaccompanied. Score analysis and compositionprojects. Prerequisite: MUTH 2200 or consent of instructor. SPRING. [3] Carl Smith. (Offered alternate years) MUTH3140 - Historical Traditions in Composition and in Performance

projects. Prerequisite: MUTH 2200 or consent of instructor. SPRING. [3] Carl Smith. (Offered alternate years) MUTH3140 - Historical Traditions in Composition and in PerformanceTopical approach to historical performance traditions, 1610-1897, addressed through musical analysis and through study of historical performance styles. Emphasis on application of these interpretive skills to live performance. Prerequisite: MUTH 2200. FALL [3]. Carl Smith.

MUTH3150 - Early Keyboard LiteratureKeyboard music from the late fifteenth to the early eighteenth century. Compositional techniques and performance practices; study of period instruments; literature for clavichord, harpsichord, organ, and fortepiano.FALL. [2] Carl Smith. (Offered alternate years)

MUTH3160 - 16th-Century CounterpointPrinciples of voice leading and linear structure through the study of 16th-century counterpoint. Graduated composition exercises, performance, repertoire analysis, historical approaches to theory, study of text setting, meter, and form. Prerequisite: MUTH 2400.MUTH3170 - Techniques of Composing for MediaCourse DescriptionTechniques for effective composing for media such as film, television, games, and Internet, including composing with virtual instruments, digital audio mixing and synchronizing to video. Creation of a 5-7 minute original sound track or film composing demo reel. Prerequisite: COMP 1100 or MUTH 2400 or permission of instructor. FALL. [2]

MUTH3170 - Techniques of Composing for MediaTechniques for effective composing for media such as film, television, games, and Internet, including composing with virtual instruments, digital audio mixing and synchronizing to video. Creation of a 5-7 minute original sound track or film composing demo reel. Prerequisite: COMP 1100 or MUTH 2400 or permission of instructor. FALL. [2]

MUTH3180 - Musical Instruments, Acoustics, and the Creative MusicianMusical Instruments, Acoustics, and the Creative Musician. In this course we focus on the meeting point of the physics of sound, musical instrument materials, and human creativity. We will consider such topics as overtones, subharmonics, sound synthesis, instrument design, tuning and temperament systems, perception and illusion, and the embodied experience of the performer. We explore the relationship between science and culture and look at how the physical shape of instruments influences art (and how art shapes instruments).Throughout the course, we are guided by creativity and innovation by drawing upon musical repertoire and instrumental performance practices. Enrolled students will be selected randomly from the wait list after they have demonstrated minimum qualifications via a short quiz. Students must have a basic understanding in both music and math. On the music side, a comfort with basic music note reading and the elements of Western music (intervals, scales, rhythms). On the math side, comfort with precalculus, including basic trig, logs, and exponentials.MUTH3200 - Chromatic Harmony in the Romantic EraCourse DescriptionIntensive analysis of challenging standard repertoire by three generations of Romantic composers, whose ingenious extensions of Classic period strategies of tonal organization require interpretive tools beyond the scope of the core theory curriculum. Investigation of both large and small forms. Focus on relationships between harmonic and structural symmetries. Prerequisite: MUTH 2300. [3]

MUTH3200 - Chromatic Harmony in the Romantic EraIntensive analysis of challenging standard repertoire by three generations of Romantic composers, whose ingenious extensions of Classic period strategies of tonal organization require interpretive tools beyond the scope of the core theory curriculum. Investigation of both large and small forms. Focus on relationships between harmonic and structural symmetries. Prerequisite: MUTH 2300. [3]

MUTH3210 - Post-tonal AnalysisExploration of the post-tonal analytical techniques through intensive study of selected works of composers from the early 20th century to the present, including Debussy, Scriabin, Schoenberg, Berg, Webern, Stravinsky, Copland, Dallapiccola, Boulez, Cage, Berio, Feldman, Lachenmann. Prerequisite: MUTH 2400. SPRING. [2]

MUTH3220 - Musical Explorations: Bart√≥kIndepth study of the life and music of B√©la Bart√≥k; includes detailed investigation of salient theoretical concepts, formal structures, and the composer's integration of various regional folk musics into his own works.Prerequisites: MUTH 2400 or permission of instructor. SPRING [2] Slayton

MUTH3222 - Musical Explorations: BrittenAn introduction to the music of Benjamin Britten through close analysis of representative compositions and exploration of the composer's substantial recorded legacy. Focus on the formal and theoretical aspects of Britten's work with a detailed consideration of how musical resources and compositional techniques are employed to suggest a sense of place. Prerequisite: MUTH 2400 or permission of instructor. SPRING. [2] Deakin.

MUTH3230 - Electronic Music for ComposersThis course provides composers with a range of approaches for creating electronic music. Students will focus on historical context, technical concepts, and new hardware and software programs through hands-on creative projects.MUTH3450 - Advanced Aural Skills Seminar 1Course DescriptionDirect application of Aural Skills at more demanding levels, as well as reinforcement of existing knowledge from the Aural Skills core. Focus on score reading, practice strategies, performance, dictation, and analysis.Prerequisite: one course from MUTH 2440-60.MUTH3460 - Advanced Aural Skills Seminar 2Course DescriptionDirect application of Aural Skills at more demanding levels. Focus on score reading, practice strategies, performance, dictation, and analysis. Prerequisite: MUTH 3450.MUTH3470 - Advanced Aural Skills Seminar 3Course DescriptionDirect application of Aural Skills at more demanding levels. Focus on score reading, dictation, performance psychology, audition preparation, and Aural Skills as it pertains to career strategy. Prerequisite: MUTH 3460.MUTH3480 - Advanced Aural Skills Seminar 4Course DescriptionDirect application of Aural Skills at more demanding levels. Focus on score reading, dictation, performance psychology, audition preparation, and Aural Skills as it pertains to career strategy. Prerequisite: MUTH 3470.MUTH3890 - Special Topics in Music TheoryCourse DescriptionAdvanced study in theory, focused on various topics from year to year, including such areas as advanced counterpoint, analysis of a specific composer, Schenkerian analysis, etc. Prerequisite: varies by topic. [2 or 3, as listed.] Music theory faculty.

MUTH3450 - Advanced Aural Skills Seminar 1Direct application of Aural Skills at more demanding levels, as well as reinforcement of existing knowledge from the Aural Skills core. Focus on score reading, practice strategies, performance, dictation, and analysis.Prerequisite: one course from MUTH 2440-60.MUTH3460 - Advanced Aural Skills Seminar 2Course DescriptionDirect application of Aural Skills at more demanding levels. Focus on score reading, practice strategies, performance, dictation, and analysis. Prerequisite: MUTH 3450.MUTH3470 - Advanced Aural Skills Seminar 3Course DescriptionDirect application of Aural Skills at more demanding levels. Focus on score reading, dictation, performance psychology, audition preparation, and Aural Skills as it pertains to career strategy. Prerequisite: MUTH 3460.MUTH3480 - Advanced Aural Skills Seminar 4Course DescriptionDirect application of Aural Skills at more demanding levels. Focus on score reading, dictation, performance psychology, audition preparation, and Aural Skills as it pertains to career strategy. Prerequisite: MUTH 3470.MUTH3890 - Special Topics in Music TheoryCourse DescriptionAdvanced study in theory, focused on various topics from year to year, including such areas as advanced counterpoint, analysis of a specific composer, Schenkerian analysis, etc. Prerequisite: varies by topic. [2 or 3, as listed.] Music theory faculty.

MUTH3460 - Advanced Aural Skills Seminar 2Direct application of Aural Skills at more demanding levels. Focus on score reading, practice strategies, performance, dictation, and analysis. Prerequisite: MUTH 3450.MUTH3470 - Advanced Aural Skills Seminar 3Course DescriptionDirect application of Aural Skills at more demanding levels. Focus on score reading, dictation, performance psychology, audition preparation, and Aural Skills as it pertains to career strategy. Prerequisite: MUTH 3460.MUTH3480 - Advanced Aural Skills Seminar 4Course DescriptionDirect application of Aural Skills at more demanding levels. Focus on score reading, dictation, performance psychology, audition preparation, and Aural Skills as it pertains to career strategy. Prerequisite: MUTH 3470.MUTH3890 - Special Topics in Music TheoryCourse DescriptionAdvanced study in theory, focused on various topics from year to year, including such areas as advanced counterpoint, analysis of a specific composer, Schenkerian analysis, etc. Prerequisite: varies by topic. [2 or 3, as listed.] Music theory faculty.

MUTH3470 - Advanced Aural Skills Seminar 3Direct application of Aural Skills at more demanding levels. Focus on score reading, dictation, performance psychology, audition preparation, and Aural Skills as it pertains to career strategy. Prerequisite: MUTH 3460.MUTH3480 - Advanced Aural Skills Seminar 4Course DescriptionDirect application of Aural Skills at more demanding levels. Focus on score reading, dictation, performance psychology, audition preparation, and Aural Skills as it pertains to career strategy. Prerequisite: MUTH 3470.MUTH3890 - Special Topics in Music TheoryCourse DescriptionAdvanced study in theory, focused on various topics from year to year, including such areas as advanced counterpoint, analysis of a specific composer, Schenkerian analysis, etc. Prerequisite: varies by topic. [2 or 3, as listed.] Music theory faculty.

MUTH3480 - Advanced Aural Skills Seminar 4Direct application of Aural Skills at more demanding levels. Focus on score reading, dictation, performance psychology, audition preparation, and Aural Skills as it pertains to career strategy. Prerequisite: MUTH 3470.MUTH3890 - Special Topics in Music TheoryCourse DescriptionAdvanced study in theory, focused on various topics from year to year, including such areas as advanced counterpoint, analysis of a specific composer, Schenkerian analysis, etc. Prerequisite: varies by topic. [2 or 3, as listed.] Music theory faculty.

MUTH3890 - Special Topics in Music TheoryAdvanced study in theory, focused on various topics from year to year, including such areas as advanced counterpoint, analysis of a specific composer, Schenkerian analysis, etc. Prerequisite: varies by topic. [2 or 3, as listed.] Music theory faculty.

MWEL1120 - The Alexander Technique IAn accurate kinesthetic sense of the structure and movement of the body through hands-on and verbalinstruction in body mapping and the principles developed by F. M. Alexander. Emphasis on ordinary daily activities. Offered on a pass/fail basis only. FALL, SPRING. [1] Ahner.

MWEL1121 - The Alexander Technique IIFurther exploration of the principles of the technique applied to daily activities and developmental movement.Emphasis on individual experiences within the context of the class. Offered on a pass/fail basis only.Prerequisite: MWEL 1120. FALL, SPRING. [1] Ahner.

MWEL1130 - Meditation for MusiciansA practice-centered approach helps students develop a regular meditation routine. Each weekly session involves meditation, in-class reading, listening, and performance. Offered on a pass/fail basis.MWEL1140 - Tai Chi for MusiciansCourse DescriptionPrinciples of Tai Chi applied to musical performance. The practice and understanding of anatomical movement, with emphasis on prevention of injury. Offered on a pass/fail basis.MWEL1150 - Chakra YogaCourse Descriptiontudy of the seven chakras, or energy centers, of the body. Emphasis on aligning the chakras through gentle yoga practice (beginner level), and cultivating student well-being. Offered on a pass/fail basis. FALL, SPRING. [1]

MWEL1140 - Tai Chi for MusiciansPrinciples of Tai Chi applied to musical performance. The practice and understanding of anatomical movement, with emphasis on prevention of injury. Offered on a pass/fail basis.MWEL1150 - Chakra YogaCourse Descriptiontudy of the seven chakras, or energy centers, of the body. Emphasis on aligning the chakras through gentle yoga practice (beginner level), and cultivating student well-being. Offered on a pass/fail basis. FALL, SPRING. [1]

MWEL1150 - Chakra Yogatudy of the seven chakras, or energy centers, of the body. Emphasis on aligning the chakras through gentle yoga practice (beginner level), and cultivating student well-being. Offered on a pass/fail basis. FALL, SPRING. [1]

MWEL2120 - The Performer and the BodyApplication of the Alexander Technique in a small group setting with attention to aspects of musical performance, including practice skills and performance anxiety. Offered on a pass/fail basis. May be repeated once for credit. Prerequisite: MWEL 1120. B.Mus. and B.Mus.Arts students or permission of the instructor. [1]

MUSC2100 - Musicianship Level IExamination of the sound properties of pitches, intervals and rhythms and their notation in real time. Focus is on diatonic scales and modes. Lectures, discussion, real-time listening experiences, dictation, sight-singing, score reading, and improvisation are integrated throughout the course. Corequisite: MUTH 2100. FALL. [1] McGuire, Williams.

MUSC2200 - Musicianship Level IIContinuation of Musicianship Level I. Focus on the employment of pitches, intervals and rhythms in functional tonal contexts. Lectures, discussion, real-time listening experiences, dictation, sight-singing, score reading, and improvisation are integrated throughout the course. Prerequisite: MUSC 2100; corequisite: MUTH 2200. SPRING.[1] McGuire, Williams.

MUSC2300 - Musicianship Level IIIContinuation of Musicianship II. Focus on tonal modulation and chromaticism. Lectures, discussion, real-time listening experiences, dictation, sight-singing, score reading, and improvisation are integrated throughout the course. Prerequisite: MUSC 2200; corequisite: MUTH 2300. FALL. [1] McGuire.

MUSC2400 - Musicianship Level IVContinuation of Musicianship III. Focus on the employment of pitches, intervals and rhythms in non-tonal contexts. Lectures, discussion, real-time listening experiences, dictation, sight-singing, score reading, and improvisation are integrated throughout the course. Prerequisite: MUSC 2300; corequisite: MUTH 2400. SPRING.[1] McGuire.

MUSC3105 - Advanced Musicianship VFurther development of aural skills, including techniques for hearing, singing, reading, and writing tonal and atonal music in real time. Prerequisite: MUTH 2440, 2441, or 2442. FALL. [1]

MUSC3106 - Advanced Musicianship VIFurther development of aural skills, including techniques for hearing, singing, reading, and writing tonal and atonal music in real time. Prerequisite: MUSC 3105. SPRING. [1] Ploger.

MUSC3107 - Advanced Musicianship VIIA continuation of techniques studied in MUSC 3106. Hearing in tonal and atonal music, including extended harmonic and melodic structures, complex rhythmic elements, and score reading. Discussion of pedagogical approaches to teaching aural studies. Prerequisite: MUSC 3106. FALL. [1] Ploger

MUSC3108 - Advanced Musicianship VIIIA continuation of techniques studied in MUSC 3107. Hearing in tonal and atonal music, including extended harmonic and melodic structures, complex rhythmic elements, and score reading. Discussion of pedagogical approaches to teaching aural studies. Prerequisite: MUSC 3107. SPRING. [1] Ploger

MUSL1100 - World MusicWorld music as a cultural product; selected musics of Africa, Native America, India, Indonesia, and African America. Topics include music and religion, popular music, field work methodology, and gender issues. Not open to students who have completed MUSL 2100. FALL. [3] Fry.

MUSL1105 - African MusicA survey of selected traditional and popular music of Africa. Historical, social, and cultural contexts; listening; some performances in class. SPRING. [3]

MUSL1111 - First-Year Writing SeminarIndependent learning and inquiry in an environment in which students can express knowledge and defend opinions through class discussion, oral presentations, and written expression. Topics vary. Open to freshmen only. FALL. [3] Musicology and Ethnomusicology faculty.

MUSL1200 - Introduction to Western Classical MusicAn introduction to the literature of music from AD 600 to the present through a study of selected works.Extensive listening is required. Not open to students who have completed MUSL 2200W. Counts toward a minor, but not a major, in music. [3]

MUSL1210 - The ConcertoA close study of representative works, from the Baroque invention of the concerto principle up to modernist and contemporary adaptations. Focus on structural listening. No previous training in music required. FALL. [3]

MUSL1220 - The SymphonyA course which will examine symphonies from the Western Classical tradition. Lectures and class discussions focus on the music's content and cultural context. Ability to follow a musical score required.MUSL1240 - Opera for EveryoneCourse DescriptionAn introduction to opera for non-music majors who want to listen and watch for pleasure as well as critical engagement. The ability to read a score is not required. [3]

MUSL1240 - Opera for EveryoneAn introduction to opera for non-music majors who want to listen and watch for pleasure as well as critical engagement. The ability to read a score is not required. [3]

MUSL1300 - Music, the Arts, and IdeasThe changing historical relationships among music, literature, fine arts, and philosophy. Musical developments as responses to social, political, and economic circumstances. FALL. [3] Link.

MUSL1310 - Love and Death in MusicPerspectives on two great problems of human life throughout the history of Western music. Themes include idealized love, sexual pathology, love and realism, love of God, confronting death, transcending death.Connections of music to visual arts, literature, film. No musical background required. [3] Michael Rose. (Offered alternate years)

MUSL1320 - The Music of the OutliersSeminar centering on the music of composers who were/are unorthodox in their thinking, who resistedprescribed notions of what music is and challenged the world around them to think about sound in new ways.Topics include the "reactionary" climate of the 20th century; modernism and post-modernism; electronics in music; minimalism and microtonalism; performance art and "Art-Pop." Not open to students who have completed MUTH 2400. Does not count toward a major in music. No prior experience in music necessary.Maymester [3] Slayton

MUSL1330 - Cross-Currents in Music and ArtSurvey of selected pairings or groupings of artists and composers through four centuries of art and music in Europe and the United States. [3] Michael Rose.

MUSL1340 - Music, Sports, and SocietyThis course explores the intersection of sports and music, broadly defined, in 20th- and 21st-century U.S.contexts, with some attention to global convergences of athletics and music. [3]

MUSL1600 - American Popular MusicHistorical study of ways the culture of a nation is reflected and sometimes shaped by the chosen musics of the groups comprising the American "salad bowl." Topics include audience reception; production and consumption; multiculturalism; and meaning.MUSL1610 - Musical Theatre in America: A Cultural HistoryCourse DescriptionFrom eighteenth century melodrama and vaudeville through the musicals of the 1940s and 1950s to thecontemporary emphasis on integration of spectacle, dance, and other theatrical arts. Readings, live productions, guest lecturers, and film. SPRING. [3] Lovensheimer. (Offered alternate years.)

MUSL1610 - Musical Theatre in America: A Cultural HistoryFrom eighteenth century melodrama and vaudeville through the musicals of the 1940s and 1950s to thecontemporary emphasis on integration of spectacle, dance, and other theatrical arts. Readings, live productions, guest lecturers, and film. SPRING. [3] Lovensheimer. (Offered alternate years.)

MUSL1620 - Survey of JazzA survey of jazz history, with particular attention to the major composers, "Jelly Roll" Morton, Duke Ellington, and Thelonius Monk, who gave the music synthesis and form; and to its major innovative soloists, Louis Armstrong, Charlie Parker, and Ornette Coleman, who renewed its musical language. FALL, SPRING. [3] Fry.

MUSL1630 - The BluesDownhome, classic, Chicago, and urban blues-history, musical structure, musical styles, singers' lives, and meanings of blues lyrics. The current blues revival, blues and tourism, race and revisionist blues scholarship, and the relation of blues to African American poetry and fiction. Artists such as Ma Rainey, Charley Patton, Robert Johnson, Lightnin' Hopkins, Muddy Waters, B.B. King, Buddy Guy, Robert Cray. SPRING. [3] Fry.

MUSL1640 - Country MusicA musical and cultural survey of the talents, traditions, and trends of country music from its Colonial roots to its current status as a multi-million dollar global industry. Focus on the music, creators, and performers of that music and its cultural and social contexts. FALL, SPRING. [3] Cooper.

MUSL1650 - History of Rock MusicHistory and development of rock and roll music and its performance from the 1950s to the present. Major artists from each decade, subgenres (rockabilly, R&B, folk, soul, metal, pop, alternative, etc.), and technological, cultural, and economic developments that helped shape the music. FALL, SPRING. [3] Gunderman.

MUSL1660 - Music and Tourism: Music City Museum & MemorabiliaAn exploration of the intersection between popular music and tourism. Music landmarks as tourist attractions, music memorabilia and museums, tourism and urban development, souvenirs as travel credentials, and tourism and issues of representation. FALL. [3] Fry.

MUSL1670 - Survey of American Hip HopThis course examines the history of hip hop and culture from the 1970s to the present, including current debates and discussions. It explores the dynamics of hip-hop culture regarding its historical development, political influence and social impact, particularly in American culture. This class also explores relevant issues surrounding race, gender, cultural relations, economics and social barriers relating to hip-hop music and culture.Discussions will include the coexistence of various hip hop styles and the exploitation of this music and culture as a commodity for national and global consumption. [3] Chase

MUSL2100 - Music as Global CultureMusic and musical cultures from around the world. Students will approach indigenous music theories on their own terms in order to understand and complement the complexities of contemporary Western Musicperformance styles and expectations. Emphasis on fundamental elements (e.g., rhythm, pitch, harmony, and form) of diverse musical practices. Transcription, notation, and analysis of a variety of melodic and rhythmic forms. Not open to students who have completed MUSL 1100. Prerequisite: Open to B.Mus. and B.Mus.Arts students, declared second majors, or with demonstrated musical literacy and permission of instructor.MUSL2110 - Music in Latin America and the CaribbeanCourse DescriptionAn introduction to a wide variety of musical genres and traditions in Latin America and the Caribbean.Indigenous, folk, popular, and art music forms and their social function, meaning, historical development, cultural blending, and cross-hybridization. SPRING. [3] Simonett.

MUSL2110 - Music in Latin America and the CaribbeanAn introduction to a wide variety of musical genres and traditions in Latin America and the Caribbean.Indigenous, folk, popular, and art music forms and their social function, meaning, historical development, cultural blending, and cross-hybridization. SPRING. [3] Simonett.

MUSL2120 - Music in Southeast AsiaAn introduction to the varied musical and performing cultures of Southeast Asia through historical and ethnographic perspectives. Court music traditions, music in religious rituals, dance and theater, popular and (western) art music practices in the region. Includes some hands-on learning of musical instruments and repertoire.MUSL2150 - Music, Identity, and DiversityCourse DescriptionIssues of multiculturalism and intersections with musical expression in America. Cultural determinants, such as race, gender, ethnicity, class, religion, language, ideology, folklore, and history will be studied critically.Prerequisite: any MUSL course or AMER 1002. FALL. [3]

MUSL2150 - Music, Identity, and DiversityIssues of multiculturalism and intersections with musical expression in America. Cultural determinants, such as race, gender, ethnicity, class, religion, language, ideology, folklore, and history will be studied critically.Prerequisite: any MUSL course or AMER 1002. FALL. [3]

MUSL2200W - Music in Western CultureAn overview of music in the Western art tradition, including its basic historical periods, styles, genres and disciplines. Tangible applications of historical, analytical, and cultural thinking to musical performance. Guided discussion, varied writing assignments, and presentations. Prerequisite: Open to B.Mus. and B.Mus.Arts students, declared music minors/second majors, or with demonstrated musical literacy and permission of instructor. SPRING. [3] Musicology faculty.

MUSL2310 - The Bible and MusicAn investigation of Biblical texts (Old Testament/Tanach; Deuterocanonical texts/Old Testament Apocrypha; New Testament) that have inspired musical settings and the musical settings themselves. Emphasis on literary and musical analysis and interpretation. No musical or scriptural background assumed. FALL. [3] Rose and Levine.

MUSL2320 - Exploring the Film SoundtrackRelationships among soundtrack, image, and narrative in film. The complex of music, sound, and dialog in a variety of American films, from silents to Hollywood blockbusters and cartoons. Topics include diegesis, temporality, continuity, and musical style. Discussion, video, and film research, reading, and listening. No musical background required. SPRING. [3] Link.

MUSL2330 - Words and MusicAn investigation of works of literature that have inspired musical settings and the musical settings themselves.Emphasis on literary and musical analysis and interpretation. No musical background assumed. Repeat credit for students who have completed ENGL 3736. [3] Michael Rose and Mark Jarman, Professor of English. (Spring) MUSL2340 - Music in Narrative Fiction

Emphasis on literary and musical analysis and interpretation. No musical background assumed. Repeat credit for students who have completed ENGL 3736. [3] Michael Rose and Mark Jarman, Professor of English. (Spring) MUSL2340 - Music in Narrative FictionExploration of music as an explicit narrative presence in fiction of the 20th and 21st centuries. Examination of the roles of music as plot device, symbol, setting, and character development as embodied in various genres including popular, classical, and jazz. Analysis of complete novels and short fiction combined with the theoretical, social, and historical analysis of music, with synthesis in creative responses. [3]

MUSL2350 - The Miracle of Venice: Sound, Space, Vision, and PowerIn perhaps no other country were the arts so intimately fused with a sense of national mission as in the Republic of Venice, a miniature semi-democratic nation-state which emerged during the death throes of the Roman Empire and which collapsed with the Napoleonic invasion of 1797. This course will celebrate and evaluate those magnificent works of music, architecture, art, and film produced by artists living in the city, and, increasingly after 1797, by fascinated foreigners. The class will combine elements of lecture, seminar, and independent study, designed to allow for the maximization of each student's interests, musical and otherwise. There is no formal prerequisite. [3]

MUSL2600 - American MusicA history of music in the United States, 1620 to the present. Distinctly American musical traditions such as shape-notes, minstrelsy, jazz, twentieth-century syntheses. Recommended: MUSL 2200W or 1200, or music-reading skills sufficient to follow a score. FALL. [3] Lovensheimer.

MUSL2610 - Music of the SouthThe musical riches of the American South approached from various perspectives, including the historical, cultural, social, political, and religious. Blues, country, and gospel are the primary genres of study; jazz, folk, and classical traditions in the South also receive attention. Prerequisite: any MUSL course or AMER 1002. FALL. [3]

MUSL2620 - DIY Movements: Hip Hop, Punk, and the Democratization of America's PopAn exploration of the history, continuation, and aesthetics of the DIY music movement in the United States and abroad. A historical approach will be used, with an emphasis on important styles, artists, and social and cultural issues. Students will gain an understanding of hip hop and punk as musical and performative forms, how they are created, how they are interpreted, and how they are a direct expression of the cultural context in which they are produced. Prerequisite: any MUSL course. [3] Fry

MUSL3100 - Music of the 20th and 21st CenturiesAn exploration of the wealth and diversity of European and American art music since 1900. Emphasis on the historical, cultural, philosophical, and technological contexts that encourage an approach to this music on its own terms. Prerequisite: B.Mus. and B.Mus.Arts students and second majors, MUSL 2200W and 2100; music minors, MUSL 2200W or 1200; or permission of instructor.MUSL3160 - Women and Rock MusicCourse DescriptionAn exploration of the ways that women have made their voices heard in rock on stage, in the studio, behind the scenes, and as fans. Prerequisite: Any MUSL or GSS course.MUSL3213 - Artist, Community, and DemocracyCourse DescriptionCommunities of diverse artists, minority viewpoints, and cultural pluralism in a democratic society.Contemporary United States with cross-cultural and historical comparisons. [3]

MUSL3160 - Women and Rock MusicAn exploration of the ways that women have made their voices heard in rock on stage, in the studio, behind the scenes, and as fans. Prerequisite: Any MUSL or GSS course.MUSL3213 - Artist, Community, and DemocracyCourse DescriptionCommunities of diverse artists, minority viewpoints, and cultural pluralism in a democratic society.Contemporary United States with cross-cultural and historical comparisons. [3]

MUSL3213 - Artist, Community, and DemocracyCommunities of diverse artists, minority viewpoints, and cultural pluralism in a democratic society.Contemporary United States with cross-cultural and historical comparisons. [3]

MUSL3220 - Opera in the 17th and 18th CenturiesIn-depth study of five or six representative works. Score and libretto analysis, reception history, cult of the performer, role of the contemporary producer-director. Prerequisite: B.Mus. and B.Mus.Arts students and second majors, MUSL 2100, 2200W, and 3100; music minors, MUSL 2200W or 1200; or permission of instructor. FALL.[3] Calico.

MUSL3221 - Opera in the 19th CenturyIn-depth study of five or six representative works. Score and libretto analysis, reception history, cult of the performer, role of the contemporary producer-director. Prerequisites: B.Mus. and B.Mus.Arts students and second majors, MUSL 3100; music minors, MUSL 2200W or 1200; or permission of instructor. SPRING. [3] Calico.

MUSL3222 - Mahler Symphonies: Songs of IronyAn exploration of large orchestral works of Gustav Mahler emphasizing their demonstration of the synthesis of symphony and song and their reflection of nineteenth-century German philosophies of irony. Prerequisites: B.Mus. and B.Mus.Arts students and second majors, MUSL 3100; music minors, MUSL 2200W or 1200; orpermission of instructor. SPRING. [3] Lovensheimer.

MUSL3223 - Music in the Age of Beethoven and SchubertThe musical legacy of each composer in culture and (especially) social context: patrons, family, and friends.Prerequisites: B.Mus. and B.Mus.Arts students and second majors, MUSL 3100; music minors, MUSL 2200W or 1200; or permission of instructor. FALL. [3] Cyrus, Lowe, Shadle.

MUSL3224 - Haydn and MozartAn in-depth look at the music of Haydn and Mozart in cultural and social contexts. Prerequisite: B.Mus. and B.Mus. students and second majors, MUSL 3100; music minors, MUSL 2200W or 1200; or permission ofinstructor. FALL. [3] Lowe.

MUSL3225 - Brahms and the Anxiety of InfluenceA study of Brahms' large-scale orchestral works and other selected literature from the perspective of 'influence.'Musical relationships to Couperin, JS Bach and sons, Beethoven, Wagner, Schoenberg and others. Topics include Brahms' self-image; Brahms as conductor, performer and editor; stylistic fingerprints; popular and folk elements; Brahms and later composers; his relationship to Clara; the Wagner-Brahms debate. Prerequisites: B.Mus. and B.Mus.Arts students and second majors, MUSL 3100; music minors, MUSL 2200W or 2100; or permission of instructor. FALL. [3] Cyrus. (Offered alternate years)

MUSL3226 - The String QuartetAn intensive exploration of the string quartet. Topics for discussion include origins and history of the genre, rhetoric, audience, reception, interpretation, and performance practice. Prerequisite: B.Mus. and B.Mus.Arts students and second majors, MUSL 3100; music minors, MUSL 2200W or 1200; or permission of instructor.SPRING. [3] Lowe.

MUSL3227 - Music in the Age of Revolution, 1789-1848Explores developments in genres, styles, patronage, and careers brought on by socioeconomic and political change from late Haydn to Wagner. Topics include nationalism, Romanticism, rise of the middle class, touring virtuoso, composer/critic. Musical analysis, historical and cultural context. Prerequisites: B.Mus. and B.Mus.Arts students and second majors, MUSL 3100; music minors, MUSL 2200W or 1200; or permission of instructor. FALL.[3] Calico, Shadle.

MUSL3228 - J.S. Bach: Learned Musician & Virtual TravelerExplores the life and works of high baroque composer J.S. Bach, who developed a highly cosmopolitan, erudite musical style. Course will include structural and stylistic analysis and will also address biography, cultural context, and performance practice. Prerequisites: B.Mus. and B.Mus.Arts students and second majors, MUSL3100; music minors, MUSL 2200W or 1200; or permission of instructor. SPRING. [3] Lowe.

MUSL3229 - Robert Schumann and the Romantic SensibilityAn exploration of Robert Schumann's music and criticism within the context of German Romanticism. B.Mus. and B.Mus.Arts students and second majors, MUSL 3100; music minors, MUSL 2200W or 1200; or permission of instructor. SPRING. [3] Lovensheimer.

MUSL3230 - Music and the Construction of National IdentityAn in-depth exploration of the tools used to construct national musical identities during the long nineteenth century (ca. 1789-1914), including compositional style, performance techniques, and music criticism. Addresses topics from Western Europe, Eastern Europe, and the Americas. Prerequisite: B.Mus. and B.Mus.Arts students and second majors: MUSL 3100; music minors: MUSL 1200 or 2200W; or permission of instructor. SPRING. [3]

MUSL3231 - The Art of Program Music: Tone Painting and Symphonic PoetryAn in-depth exploration of the style, philosophical basis, and possible meanings of program music, broadly defined. Examples will be taken from the sixteenth century to the present with a focus on the long nineteenth century (1789-1914). Pre-requisite: B.Mus majors, B.Mus.Arts majors, and second majors: MUSL 3100; music minors: MUSL 2200W or 1200; or permission of instructor. [3]

MUSL3232 - God, Sex, and Politics in Early MusicAn exploration of the intersecting topics of religious practice, love and sexuality, and power structures in early music. Students will gain familiarity with many of the major currents, cultures, composers, and contexts of Western European music from ca. 1100-1650. In addition to the primary themes of the course, we will entertain such other musically relevant topics as mathematics, early music theory, mysticism, the role of women in early music, the development of notation, and questions of performance and interpretation. Prerequisite: B.Mus. and B.Mus.Arts students and second majors, MUSL 3100; music minors, MUSL 2200W or 1200; or permission of instructor. [3] Lowe

MUSL3233 - Music and the EnvironmentAn exploration of how music, sound, nature, and culture interact both with and within the environment, engage in current issues of conservation and sustainability, and influence musical creation and expression. We will employ methodologies drawn from musicology, ethnomusicology, sound studies, ecology, environmentalhistory, and ecocriticism to consider musical portraiture of the natural world, historical soundscapes, sonic representations of the environmental past, animal and interspecies musical performance, digital nonhuman musical environments, soundscape ecology, the music/sound of environmental change, and social-activist roles of music in periods of environmental crisis. To emphasize the importance of musical thinking about the interconnections of people and planet, this course culminates in ecomusicological explorations of the Anthropocene. Prerequisite: B.Mus. and B.Mus. Arts students and second majors: MUSL 3100; music minors: MUSL 2200W or 1200; or permission of instructor. [3]

MUSL3234 - Modernist, Contemporary, and Experimental OperaOpera since the early twentieth century and relevant analytical tools. Begins with canonical works representing a range of compositional styles and entry points for examination. The second half builds on those skills and adds new modes of investigation appropriate for repertoire since 2000. [3]

MUSL3235 - Music, Pandemics, and HistoryMusical experiences from the COVID-19 pandemic juxtaposed with an historical corpus of music responding to disease outbreaks, epidemics, and pandemics, including balcony singing and processions, plague masses, chants and motets requesting intercession, fundraisers and educational music, and cantatas celebrating deliverance. [3]

MUSL3236 - Music, Gender, and SexualityExploration of gender and sexuality in Western art and vernacular musical traditions. Topics include gendered musical forms, genres, and performance; feminist music criticism; ideologies of musical authorship and genius; musical canons; and musical representations of gender and sexuality.MUSL3237 - Women and MusicCourse DescriptionAn investigation of the roles women have played in the development of Western music - performance,composition, patronage, education -and the social and economic factors that have influenced their position.MUSL3238 - Global JazzCourse DescriptionAn exploration of jazz's movement, transformation, and meaning in today's world. Through a series of global case studies, this course will address jazz and its connection to place, history, globalization, politics, media, and identity.MUSL3239 - Music and DanceCourse DescriptionThis course explores the dynamic relationship between music and dance in its varied global traditions. Ballet and other classical forms, stylized dances as concert music, social dancing, dance and movement in popular culture, folk dance traditions, dance as healing.MUSL3850 - Independent StudyCourse DescriptionDevelopment and execution of a program of study in musicology or ethnomusicology under the direction of a member of the department. (See Academic Regulations section.) Repeatable for credit, variable up to 3 hours per semester. Musicology faculty. [1-3]

MUSL3237 - Women and MusicAn investigation of the roles women have played in the development of Western music - performance,composition, patronage, education -and the social and economic factors that have influenced their position.MUSL3238 - Global JazzCourse DescriptionAn exploration of jazz's movement, transformation, and meaning in today's world. Through a series of global case studies, this course will address jazz and its connection to place, history, globalization, politics, media, and identity.MUSL3239 - Music and DanceCourse DescriptionThis course explores the dynamic relationship between music and dance in its varied global traditions. Ballet and other classical forms, stylized dances as concert music, social dancing, dance and movement in popular culture, folk dance traditions, dance as healing.MUSL3850 - Independent StudyCourse DescriptionDevelopment and execution of a program of study in musicology or ethnomusicology under the direction of a member of the department. (See Academic Regulations section.) Repeatable for credit, variable up to 3 hours per semester. Musicology faculty. [1-3]

MUSL3238 - Global JazzAn exploration of jazz's movement, transformation, and meaning in today's world. Through a series of global case studies, this course will address jazz and its connection to place, history, globalization, politics, media, and identity.MUSL3239 - Music and DanceCourse DescriptionThis course explores the dynamic relationship between music and dance in its varied global traditions. Ballet and other classical forms, stylized dances as concert music, social dancing, dance and movement in popular culture, folk dance traditions, dance as healing.MUSL3850 - Independent StudyCourse DescriptionDevelopment and execution of a program of study in musicology or ethnomusicology under the direction of a member of the department. (See Academic Regulations section.) Repeatable for credit, variable up to 3 hours per semester. Musicology faculty. [1-3]

MUSL3239 - Music and DanceThis course explores the dynamic relationship between music and dance in its varied global traditions. Ballet and other classical forms, stylized dances as concert music, social dancing, dance and movement in popular culture, folk dance traditions, dance as healing.MUSL3850 - Independent StudyCourse DescriptionDevelopment and execution of a program of study in musicology or ethnomusicology under the direction of a member of the department. (See Academic Regulations section.) Repeatable for credit, variable up to 3 hours per semester. Musicology faculty. [1-3]

MUSL3850 - Independent StudyDevelopment and execution of a program of study in musicology or ethnomusicology under the direction of a member of the department. (See Academic Regulations section.) Repeatable for credit, variable up to 3 hours per semester. Musicology faculty. [1-3]

MUSL3890 - Selected Topics in Music HistorySelected methodological approaches focused on a particular topic. Offerings have included "Music and the American Presidency," "Schoenberg and the Word," "Mingus, Monk, and Miles: Jazz Biography and Jazz Composition," "Stephen Sondheim and the American Musical," and "Mozart Piano Concertos." Prerequisite: varies by topic. May be repeated for credit when topics vary. [3] Musicology faculty.

MUSL4978 - Senior ThesisCompletion of an extended paper based in musicological or ethnomusicological research under the supervision of a faculty sponsor. Progress monitored via tutorials. Open only to seniors. Prerequisite: MUSL 3100. Variable credit, 1-3 hours each semester; may be repeated once. Musicology faculty. [1-3]

MUSL4998 - Senior Honors ThesisIndependent research on a musicological or ethnomusicological topic, culminating in a written thesis submitted to the faculty. Progress monitored via tutorials. Students completing this course with distinction, including a thesis and an oral defense, will earn honors or highest honors in music literature and history. Open only to students in the department honors program. Prerequisite: departmental approval of formal prospectus. [3]

MUSL4999 - Senior Honors ThesisIndependent research on a musicological or ethnomusicological topic, culminating in a written thesis submitted to the faculty. Progress monitored via tutorials. Students completing this course with distinction, including a thesis and an oral defense, will earn honors or highest honors in music literature and history. Open only to students in the department honors program. Prerequisite: departmental approval of formal prospectus. [3]

NANO3000 - Imaging Techniques in Nanoscale EngineeringPrinciples and practical applications. Processes behind signal formation and use in characterizing material and biological systems at the nanoscale. Includes hands-on laboratory experiments that highlight thecharacterization capabilities of modern transmission electron, scanning electron, and focused ion beam scanning electron microscopes for imaging nanostructures. Prerequisite: MATH 1301; CHEM 1602 or MSE 1500.FALL. [3]

NS1100 - Introduction to Naval Science (Navy and Marine option)No Credit Toward Current Degree. [3]

NS1300 - Naval Operations (Navy option)No Credit Toward Current Degree. [3]

NS2410 - Organization and Management (Navy & Marine option)[3]

NS2420 - Leadership and Ethics (Navy & Marine option)No Credit Toward Current Degree. [3]

NS-PC2410 - Leadership and ManagementThis course presents a comprehensive study of organizational behavior and management with special emphasis on situational leadership in the military and civilian sectors and the development of your skills in organizational thinking and problem solving. You will explore a variety of leadership and management topics, including the classical theories of management, motivation and communication. FALL. [3]

NS-PC4242 - Leadership and EthicsAn exploration of major Western ethical philosophy in the development and application of leadership to enhance objective, sound and timely decision-making in the most challenging of environments. This course follows theoretical examination with case studies and practical application to emphasize the importance of ethical reasoning to leadership, and explores components of character and integrity in decision making. SPRING. [3]

NSC1001 - Commons iSeminarTopics vary. General Elective credit only. [1] (No AXLE credit)

NSC2201 - NeuroscienceNSC2222 - Classical NeuroscienceCourse DescriptionHistory of key concepts in modern neuroscience, their context and impact through the original scientific articles that introduced them, with emphasis in their application in furthering oral and writing science communication skills. [3] (MNS)

NSC2222 - Classical NeuroscienceHistory of key concepts in modern neuroscience, their context and impact through the original scientific articles that introduced them, with emphasis in their application in furthering oral and writing science communication skills. [3] (MNS)

NSC3235 - Biological Basis of Mental DisordersCellular and molecular neuropathology of cortical dysfunction resulting from affective disorders, drug addiction, neurodegenerative disease, and stroke. Prerequisite: NSC 2201 and BSCI 1510. [3] (MNS)

NSC3240 - Neurobiology of AddictionNeural basis of the regulation and dysregulation of reward processing. Pathophysiology of addiction. Serves as repeat credit for NSC 3891 Section 01 in Spring 2016. Prerequisite 2201. [3] (MNS)

NSC3245 - Drug Discovery for Neuropsychiatric DisordersDiscovery and development of novel medicines for neurological and psychiatric illness. History of drug discovery, target identification and validation, and medicinal chemistry. In vitro high-throughput screening, drug metabolism, and pharmacokinetics. Prerequisite: 2201. [3] (MNS)

NSC3250 - Neurological DiseaseBiological basis of neurological diseases and their treatments. Neurodevelopmental disorders, TBI, Alzheimer's, Huntington's, and Parkinson's Disease. Established knowledge, patient experiences, mechanisms ofpharmacological treatments, and ongoing research. Data from primary literature and clinically-relevant case studies. No credit for students who completed NSC 3891 section 01 offered Fall 2021 or 2022. Prerequisite: 2201. [3] (MNS)

NSC3251 - GABARole of GABA in neural function/dysfunction. GABA receptor structure and function in disorders such as epilepsy, addiction, and anxiety. How primary literature informs our current understanding of inhibition in the nervous system. No credit for students who completed NSC 3891 section 01 offered spring 2021 or spring 2022, or section 03 offered fall 2019. Prerequisite: 2201. [3] (MNS)

NSC3252 - NeurophysiologyElectrical mechanisms within the nervous system and the lab techniques used to investigate them. Principles of current flow; basis of the resting potential; structure and function of voltage-gated and neurotransmitter-gated ion channels; generation and propagation of action potentials; circuit model of a neuron. Prerequisite: 2201. Not open to students who completed NSC 3891 section 02 Neurophysiology offered fall 2022, fall 2021, fall 2020.[3] (MNS)

NSC3260 - PsychopharmacologySynaptic actions of therapeutic and recreational drugs. Research approaches for drug actions and substance use disorder. Circuit mechanisms of effects on cognition and behavior. Serves as repeat credit for NSC 3630 or PSY 3630 (if taken Spring 2023 or earlier). Prerequisite: NSC 2201. [3] (MNS)

NSC3269 - Developmental NeuroscienceNormal and abnormal brain development. Cell division, migration, and death; synapse formation and plasticity; and clinical syndromes. Prerequisite: 2201. [3] (MNS)

NSC3270 - Computational NeuroscienceTheoretical, mathematical, and simulation models of neurons, neural networks, or brain systems. Computational approaches to analyzing and understanding data from behavior, neurophysiology, electrophysiology, or brain imaging. Simulation methods for neural models. Course taught using Python. Recommended: NSC2201.Prerequisite: either DS 1100/CS 1100, 1101, 1103, or 1104 (or a more advanced programming course); and either MATH 1200 or 1300 (or a more advanced calculus course). [3] (MNS)

NSC3272 - Structure and Function of the Cerebral CortexClassic and current concepts of cerebral function. Species differences, receptive field organization, neurotransmitters, modifications by experience, and behavioral effects. Prerequisite: 2201. [3] (MNS) NSC3274 - Neuroanatomy

Classic and current concepts of cerebral function. Species differences, receptive field organization, neurotransmitters, modifications by experience, and behavioral effects. Prerequisite: 2201. [3] (MNS) NSC3274 - NeuroanatomyFunctional and comparative anatomy of nervous systems, emphasis on vertebrate brains. Fundamentalconcepts, organizational principles, structure, connectivity, and how these relate to function and behavior.Demonstrations using plates with human brain sections. Offered on a graded basis only. Prerequisite: 2201. [3]

NSC3630 - Drugs and BehaviorDrug effects on neural circuits, human physiology, individual psychology, and society. Prior to spring 2023, serves as repeat credit for students who have earned credit for NSC 3260. Serves as repeat credit for students who have earned credit for PSY 3630. Prerequisite: 1200 or NSC 2201. [3] (SBS)

NSC3851 - Independent Reading in NeuroscienceReading and discussion of research papers on a selected topic under direction of a faculty sponsor. Consent of both faculty sponsor and the director of honors and independent study is required. May be repeated for credit once if there is no duplication in topic, but students may earn only up to 1 credit per semester of enrollment. [1; maximum of 2 credits for all semesters of NSC 3851] (No AXLE credit)

NSC3861 - Undergraduate ResearchOriginal student research on a defined problem in neuroscience under the direction of a faculty sponsor with"Entering Research Bootcamp" discussion section. Consent of both the faculty sponsor and the director of independent studies is required. Prerequisite: 3860 or both 2201 and sophomore standing. [3] (No AXLE credit) NSC3862 - Undergraduate Research

"Entering Research Bootcamp" discussion section. Consent of both the faculty sponsor and the director of independent studies is required. Prerequisite: 3860 or both 2201 and sophomore standing. [3] (No AXLE credit) NSC3862 - Undergraduate ResearchContinuation of 3861. Original student research on a defined problem in neuroscience under the direction of a faculty sponsor. Consent of both the faculty sponsor and the director of honors and independent studies is required. Prerequisite: 3861. [3] (No AXLE credit)

NSC3863 - Advanced Research in NeuroscienceOriginal student research on a defined problem in neuroscience under the direction of a faculty sponsor with some independence in the design and execution of the project. Consent of both the faculty sponsor and the director of honors and independent studies is required. Prerequisite: 3862. [3] (No AXLE credit)

NSC3864 - Advanced Research in NeuroscienceContinuation of a research project on a defined problem in neuroscience under the direction of a faculty sponsor with some independence in the design and execution of the project. Consent of both the faculty sponsor and the director of honors and independent studies is required. May be taken for credit more than once, but students may earn only up to 3 credits per semester. Prerequisite 3863. [3] (No AXLE credit)

NSC3891 - Special Topics in Cellular and Molecular NeuroscienceMay be repeated for credit more than once if there is no duplication in topic. Students may enroll in more than one section of this course each semester. Prerequisite: 2201. [3] (MNS)

NSC3892 - Special Topics in Systems and Integrative NeuroscienceMay be repeated for credit more than once if there is no duplication in topic. Students may enroll in more than one section of this course each semester. Prerequisite: 2201. [3] (MNS)

NSC4961 - Integrative NeuroscienceStructure and function of nervous systems. Emphasis on the vertebrate brain and the relationship of anatomy, physiology, and biochemistry to sensory perception, cognition, motor activity, and learning and memory.Prerequisite: 2201 and senior standing. [3] (MNS)

NSC4961W - Integrative NeuroscienceStructure and function of nervous systems. Emphasis on the vertebrate brain and the relationship of anatomy, physiology, and biochemistry to sensory perception, cognition, motor activity, and learning and memory. Serves as repeat credit for 4961. Prerequisite: 2201 and senior standing. [3] (MNS)

NSC4969 - Senior Seminar in NeuroscienceSeminar with advanced reading, discussion, and writing on a specific topic in neuroscience. Limited to seniors.[3] (No AXLE Credit)

NSC4999 - Honors ResearchParticipation in a research project under the direction of a faculty sponsor. Consent of both the faculty sponsor and the director of honors and independent study is required. May be repeated for credit more than once, but students may earn only up to 4 credits per semester of enrollment. [2-4] (No AXLE credit)

MUSO1000 - Recital AttendanceWeekly recitals in solo and chamber music settings, presented by students enrolled for performance instruction, and six additional faculty/student recitals and concerts. Required of all music degree (B.Mus.) students. (See Academic Regulations section of Catalog.) Offered on a pass/fail basis. [0] Melissa Rose.

MUSO1001 - Commons iSeminarOpen to first-year students of all four undergraduate schools. Topics approved by Blair faculty. Students may propose topics through the associate dean. No credit toward a major or minor in music. General Elective credit only. FALL, SPRING. [1] Staff.

MUSO1130 - Percussion SeminarOverview of percussion in Western and non-Western cultures from pre-history to present. Emphasis onEuropean/American orchestral practices. Representative works for study chosen from symphony, opera,oratorio, and other orchestral/choral sources.MUSO1201 - Lyric Theatre Workshop ICourse DescriptionIntroduction to the various performance elements of the lyric theatre experience: acting, movement,improvisation, use of the voice, stage combat, and scene study. Open to all Vanderbilt students by consent of instructor.MUSO1202 - Lyric Theatre Workshop IICourse DescriptionVarious performance elements of the lyric theatre experience: acting, movement, improvisation, use of the voice, stage combat, and scene study. Prerequisite: MUSO 1201. SPRING. [1] Shay.

MUSO1201 - Lyric Theatre Workshop IIntroduction to the various performance elements of the lyric theatre experience: acting, movement,improvisation, use of the voice, stage combat, and scene study. Open to all Vanderbilt students by consent of instructor.MUSO1202 - Lyric Theatre Workshop IICourse DescriptionVarious performance elements of the lyric theatre experience: acting, movement, improvisation, use of the voice, stage combat, and scene study. Prerequisite: MUSO 1201. SPRING. [1] Shay.

MUSO1202 - Lyric Theatre Workshop IIVarious performance elements of the lyric theatre experience: acting, movement, improvisation, use of the voice, stage combat, and scene study. Prerequisite: MUSO 1201. SPRING. [1] Shay.

MUSO1203 - Lyric Theatre Workshop for InstrumentalistsBeginning acting and movement techniques for the lyric stage as they pertain to instrumental musicians.Memorized texts, acting improvisation, and stage movement are explored to gain better connection to the music, fellow collaborators, and the audience. Application to individual instrumental repertoire required. Open by consent of instructor. SPRING. [1] Shay.

MUSO1210 - Baroque Performance for StringsAspects of period instrument performance adaptable to modern instruments and modern bows. Articulation, ornamentation, the rule of the down-bow, the influence of dance, and other technical and stylistic issues.Baroque bow provided. Culminates in a lecture-performance. May be repeated for credit. [1]

MUSO1230 - Lyric Writing WorkshopDesigned to help students find their unique voice as lyricists through lecture, reading, exercises, discussion, and lyric analysis. Does not count toward a major or minor in music. [1]

MUSO1240 - Songwriting and Elements of Music Theory(Previously MUTH 1120) Introduction to fundamental elements of music as they apply to popular songwriting techniques. Selected readings on the technical and aesthetic facets of songwriting. Listening analysis and discussion of songs in a variety of current styles. Selected aural skills as they relate to the songwriter's craft.Class visits by successful songwriters. Designed for students with little or no technical training in music. Does not count toward a major or minor in music. FALL, SPRING. [3] Walker.

MUSO1241 - Songwriting II(Previously MUTH 1125) Project-based class designed to refine and advance skills developed in MUSO 1240(previously MUTH 1120). Focuses on effective musical and lyrical thematic treatment. Extensive study of rewriting techniques; frequent performances of student compositions. Selected readings on the technical and aesthetic facets of songwriting. Listening, analysis, and discussion of songs in a variety of current styles.Occasional Monday night sessions with guest songwriters and experts in the field. Does not count toward a major or minor in music. May be repeated once for credit. Prerequisite: MUSO 1240 (previously MUTH 1120).FALL, SPRING. [3] Walker.

MUSO1302 - History of Classical RecordingA survey of the five main periods - acoustic, electric, LP, stereo and digital - of recorded classical music.Students will listen to the recordings of such legendary artists as Caruso, Paderewski, Kreisler, Toscanini and Callas. The profound impact of recording technology on performance practice itself will also be thoroughly considered. [3]

MUSO1310 - Music, Mind, and BodyThis course explores the art of musical expression through the principles and techniques of Jacques-Dalcroze.Using the theoretical framework of enactive cognition, students will engage in a reflective practice synthesizing reading, expressive movement, rhythm, and improvisation in music from a broad array of styles and cultures.MUSO1340 - Technology for MusiciansCourse DescriptionIntroduction to music related computer technology essential to the contemporary musician, including basic principles of MIDI, audio editing, audio effects, and computer music notation.MUSO1342 - Fundamentals of Audio TechnologyCourse DescriptionIntroduction to analog and digital audio, recording/editing in a digital audio workstation, microphones, signal processing, and audio-based music production techniques. Hands-on creative projects. Prerequisite: MUSO1340, or demonstrated musical literacy and permission of instructor.MUSO1344 - Electronic Music Production and Sound DesignCourse DescriptionIntroduction to hardware and software synthesizers, manipulation of basic waveforms, and sampling. Design of original virtual instruments and hands-on creative projects. Prerequisite: MUSO 1340 or permission of instructor.MUSO1346 - Mixing TechniquesCourse DescriptionProject-based focus on the improvement of student productions through effective mixing techniques.Exploration and application of balance, equalization, dynamics, reverb, compression, and other signal processing techniques. Discussion of genre specific techniques for acoustic and electronic music styles.Prerequisites: MUSO 1342 and 1344 or instructor consent.MUSO1348 - Sound and Music Production for GamesCourse DescriptionA study of sound and music production and implementation for games. Presents a solid foundation of knowledge and skills to prepare for entry-level work as a sound designer at a game development company or as a freelance game audio professional, including experience with typical game audio workflow and an historical overview of the video game industry.MUSO1400 - Diction for Singers: English and ItalianCourse DescriptionAn introduction to the International Phonetic Alphabet as applied to lyric English and Italian diction. FALL. [1]

MUSO1340 - Technology for MusiciansIntroduction to music related computer technology essential to the contemporary musician, including basic principles of MIDI, audio editing, audio effects, and computer music notation.MUSO1342 - Fundamentals of Audio TechnologyCourse DescriptionIntroduction to analog and digital audio, recording/editing in a digital audio workstation, microphones, signal processing, and audio-based music production techniques. Hands-on creative projects. Prerequisite: MUSO1340, or demonstrated musical literacy and permission of instructor.MUSO1344 - Electronic Music Production and Sound DesignCourse DescriptionIntroduction to hardware and software synthesizers, manipulation of basic waveforms, and sampling. Design of original virtual instruments and hands-on creative projects. Prerequisite: MUSO 1340 or permission of instructor.MUSO1346 - Mixing TechniquesCourse DescriptionProject-based focus on the improvement of student productions through effective mixing techniques.Exploration and application of balance, equalization, dynamics, reverb, compression, and other signal processing techniques. Discussion of genre specific techniques for acoustic and electronic music styles.Prerequisites: MUSO 1342 and 1344 or instructor consent.MUSO1348 - Sound and Music Production for GamesCourse DescriptionA study of sound and music production and implementation for games. Presents a solid foundation of knowledge and skills to prepare for entry-level work as a sound designer at a game development company or as a freelance game audio professional, including experience with typical game audio workflow and an historical overview of the video game industry.MUSO1400 - Diction for Singers: English and ItalianCourse DescriptionAn introduction to the International Phonetic Alphabet as applied to lyric English and Italian diction. FALL. [1]

MUSO1342 - Fundamentals of Audio TechnologyIntroduction to analog and digital audio, recording/editing in a digital audio workstation, microphones, signal processing, and audio-based music production techniques. Hands-on creative projects. Prerequisite: MUSO1340, or demonstrated musical literacy and permission of instructor.MUSO1344 - Electronic Music Production and Sound DesignCourse DescriptionIntroduction to hardware and software synthesizers, manipulation of basic waveforms, and sampling. Design of original virtual instruments and hands-on creative projects. Prerequisite: MUSO 1340 or permission of instructor.MUSO1346 - Mixing TechniquesCourse DescriptionProject-based focus on the improvement of student productions through effective mixing techniques.Exploration and application of balance, equalization, dynamics, reverb, compression, and other signal processing techniques. Discussion of genre specific techniques for acoustic and electronic music styles.Prerequisites: MUSO 1342 and 1344 or instructor consent.MUSO1348 - Sound and Music Production for GamesCourse DescriptionA study of sound and music production and implementation for games. Presents a solid foundation of knowledge and skills to prepare for entry-level work as a sound designer at a game development company or as a freelance game audio professional, including experience with typical game audio workflow and an historical overview of the video game industry.MUSO1400 - Diction for Singers: English and ItalianCourse DescriptionAn introduction to the International Phonetic Alphabet as applied to lyric English and Italian diction. FALL. [1]

MUSO1344 - Electronic Music Production and Sound DesignIntroduction to hardware and software synthesizers, manipulation of basic waveforms, and sampling. Design of original virtual instruments and hands-on creative projects. Prerequisite: MUSO 1340 or permission of instructor.MUSO1346 - Mixing TechniquesCourse DescriptionProject-based focus on the improvement of student productions through effective mixing techniques.Exploration and application of balance, equalization, dynamics, reverb, compression, and other signal processing techniques. Discussion of genre specific techniques for acoustic and electronic music styles.Prerequisites: MUSO 1342 and 1344 or instructor consent.MUSO1348 - Sound and Music Production for GamesCourse DescriptionA study of sound and music production and implementation for games. Presents a solid foundation of knowledge and skills to prepare for entry-level work as a sound designer at a game development company or as a freelance game audio professional, including experience with typical game audio workflow and an historical overview of the video game industry.MUSO1400 - Diction for Singers: English and ItalianCourse DescriptionAn introduction to the International Phonetic Alphabet as applied to lyric English and Italian diction. FALL. [1]

MUSO1346 - Mixing TechniquesProject-based focus on the improvement of student productions through effective mixing techniques.Exploration and application of balance, equalization, dynamics, reverb, compression, and other signal processing techniques. Discussion of genre specific techniques for acoustic and electronic music styles.Prerequisites: MUSO 1342 and 1344 or instructor consent.MUSO1348 - Sound and Music Production for GamesCourse DescriptionA study of sound and music production and implementation for games. Presents a solid foundation of knowledge and skills to prepare for entry-level work as a sound designer at a game development company or as a freelance game audio professional, including experience with typical game audio workflow and an historical overview of the video game industry.MUSO1400 - Diction for Singers: English and ItalianCourse DescriptionAn introduction to the International Phonetic Alphabet as applied to lyric English and Italian diction. FALL. [1]

MUSO1348 - Sound and Music Production for GamesA study of sound and music production and implementation for games. Presents a solid foundation of knowledge and skills to prepare for entry-level work as a sound designer at a game development company or as a freelance game audio professional, including experience with typical game audio workflow and an historical overview of the video game industry.MUSO1400 - Diction for Singers: English and ItalianCourse DescriptionAn introduction to the International Phonetic Alphabet as applied to lyric English and Italian diction. FALL. [1]

MUSO1400 - Diction for Singers: English and ItalianAn introduction to the International Phonetic Alphabet as applied to lyric English and Italian diction. FALL. [1]

MUSO1410 - Diction for Singers: GermanHigh German diction, using the International Phonetic Alphabet. Prerequisite: 1400 or permission of the instructor. SPRING. [1] Montgomery.

MUSO1420 - Diction for Singers: FrenchFrench stage diction, using the International Phonetic Alphabet. Prerequisite: 1400 or permission of the instructor. FALL. [1] Montgomery.

MUSO1501 - Community Music Partnerships: Fundamentals and Applications IDevelopment of practical skills for music-making in a variety of community service contexts. Interactive setting with a focus on skills of collaboration and communication, both as artists and with a community partner.Culminates in small case-study group performance projects. [1]

MUSO1502 - Community Music Partnerships: Fundamentals and Applications IIApplication of essential skills of programming, audience development, marketing, and collaboration, through a mentored, project-based experience with a community partner in metro Nashville. Culminates in a public performance in collaboration with the community partner. Prerequisite: MUSO 1501. [1]

MUSO2100 - Music Criticism and WritingA practical guide to writing professional music criticism. Readings include selected writings of the great critics, literary authors, program annotators and bloggers. Assignments involve listening exercises, written reviews and program notes. Difference in style among classical, jazz and rock critics will be considered. Prerequisites: MUSL2200W and MUSL 2100, or permission of instructor. FALL. [2] Pitcher.

MUSO2200 - The Movement of LineBy examining in detail interrelated examples from calligraphy, drawing, verse, and music, this course seeks to discover common elements of concept and construction in diverse forms of linear movement. Sophomorestanding and an ability to read a single line of music required. [3]

MUSO3010 - Performance in Practice, IES ViennaOpen by audition to students in the IES Vienna program. The workshop is designed to offer vocalists and instrumentalists the opportunity to expand repertoire and enhance performance skills. Rehearsal and discussion of aspects of selected works in relation to the challenge of performance. May be repeated once for credit. [2]

MUSO3100 - Music and CognitionTheories and research about the cognition of music, appreciation, and performance. Selected musical topics include timbre, consonance, dissonance, tuning, melody, rhythm, scales, modes, chords, and composition.Concepts and research from the psychological sciences emphasize sensory mechanisms, perceptualdiscriminations, pattern recognition, categorization, transfer of learning, and motor coordination. Prerequisite: one course in music or psychology. [3]

MUSO3850 - Independent StudyDevelopment of a project or a program of reading under the direction of a faculty sponsor. Consent of the faculty sponsor is required. (See Academic Regulations section.) [Repeatable for credit, variable up to 3 hours per semester.] Staff.

MUSO3970 - Junior RecitalStudents are encouraged to prepare a joint recital, shared with another degree candidate. See Blair Academic Regulations section of the Undergraduate Catalog for detailed requirements. Open by permission of instructor.[1]

MUSO4970 - Senior RecitalSee Blair Academic Regulations section of the Undergraduate Catalog for detailed requirements. Open by permission of instructor. [1]

MUSO4972 - Jazz Concentration RecitalSee Blair Academic regulations section of the Undergraduate Catalog for detailed requirements. Open by permission of instructor. [1]

PBDY2100 - Introduction to Post-Secondary Learning NeedsThis course provides an introduction to learning in higher education for first semester students. Students will be exposed to research on metacognition, executive functioning, learning strategies and goal-setting and allows students opportunities to self-evaluate their learning strengths and needs based on literature focused on adolescent and young-adult learning. [3]

PSCH1110 - Peabody Honors Seminar ISpring seminar for selected Peabody students. [3]

PSCH1817 - Peabody Honors Seminar in the Humanities and Creative ArtsOffered on a graded basis only. May be repeated for credit more than once if there is no duplication in topic, but students may earn only up to six credits per semester of enrollment. [3]

PSCH1827 - Peabody Perspectives Honors SeminarOffered on a graded basis only. May be repeated for credit more than once if there is no duplication in topic, but students may earn only up to six credits per semester of enrollment. [3]

PSCH1837 - Peabody Honors Seminar Behavioral and Social SciencesOffered on a graded basis only. May be repeated for credit more than once if there is no duplication in topic, but students may earn only up to six credits per semester of enrollment. [3]

PSCH1847 - Peabody Honors Seminar in History and Culture of the United StatesOffered on a graded basis only. May be repeated for credit more than once if there is no duplication in topic, but students may earn only up to 6 credits per semester of enrollment. [3]

PSCH1857 - Peabody Honors Seminar in Mathematics and Natural ScienceOffered on a graded basis only. May be repeated for credit more than once if there is no duplication in topic, but students may earn only up to six credits per semester of enrollment. [3]

PSCH1867 - Peabody Honors Seminar in International CulturesOffered on a graded basis only. May be repeated for credit more than once if there is no duplication in topic, but students may earn only up to six credits per semester of enrollment. [3]

PSCH2115 - Peabody Scholars Seminar IISeminar for Peabody Scholars in the second year of study. Topics vary. [0-3]

PSCH4965 - Peabody Scholars Capstone Seminar ICapstone Seminar for Peabody Scholars to be taken fall semester of the senior year. [0-3]

PSCH4966 - Peabody Scholars Capstone Seminar IICapstone Seminar for Peabody Scholars to be taken spring semester of the senior year. [0-3]

BNJO1100 - BanjoIndividual instruction focused on the art and practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. Open for elective credit. New students by interview only. Fees apply to non-B.Mus. students [1-2 variable credits, based on lesson length and repertoire as agreed on with instructor.] Brown.

BASS1000 - Bass Performance ClassWeekly observation and participation. Required of all bass majors, B.Mus. and B.Mus.Arts. Offered on a pass/fail basis. [0] Reist, Wanner.

BASS1100 - Double Bass (elective/ minors/ second majors)Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. New students by interview only. Fees apply to non-B.Mus.students. [1-2 variable credits, based on lesson length and repertoire as agreed on with instructor.] Meyer, Reist, Wanner.

BASS2100 - Double Bass (B.Mus.Arts and Integrated Studies Freshmen/Sophomores)Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. Open only to B.Mus.Arts and Integrated Studies majors. [2]

BASS2200 - Double Bass (Performance Majors Freshmen/Sophomores)Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. Open only to freshman and sophomore performance majors.[4] Meyer, Reist, Wanner.

BASS4100 - Double Bass (B.Mus.Arts and Integrated Studies Juniors/Seniors)Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. Open only to B.Mus.Arts and Integrated Studies juniors and seniors. [2] Reist, Wanner.

BASS4200 - Double Bass (Performance Majors Juniors/Seniors)Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. Open only to junior and senior performance majors.Prerequisite: successful completion of upper divisional hearing. [4] Meyer, Reist, Wanner.

BSSN1000 - Bassoon Performance ClassWeekly observation and participation. Required of all bassoon majors, B.Mus. and B.Mus.Arts. Offered on a pass/fail basis. [0] Kolkay.

BSSN1100 - Bassoon (elective/ minor / second major)Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. New students by interview only. Fees apply to non-B.Mus./B.Mus.Arts students. [1-2 variable credits, based on lesson length and repertoire as agreed on with instructor.] Kolkay.

BSSN2100 - Bassoon (B.Mus.Arts and Integrated Studies Freshmen/Sophomores)Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. Open only to B.Mus.Arts and Integrated Studies majors. [2]

BSSN2200 - Bassoon (Performance Majors Freshmen/Sophomores)Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. Open only to freshman and sophomore performance majors.[4] Kolkay.

BSSN4100 - Bassoon (B.Mus.Arts and Integrated Studies Juniors/Seniors)Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. Open only to B.Mus.Arts and Integrated Studies juniors and seniors. [2] Kolkay.

BSSN4200 - Bassoon (Performance Majors Juniors/Seniors)Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. Open only to junior and senior performance majors.Prerequisite: successful completion of upper divisional hearing. [4] Kolkay.

CLLO1000 - Cello Performance ClassWeekly observation and participation. Required of all cello majors, B.Mus. and B.Mus.Arts. Offered on a pass/fail basis. [0] Wang.

CLLO1100 - Cello (elective credit and General Music Minors)Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. New students by interview only. Fees apply to non-B.Mus./B.Mus.Arts students. [1-2 variable credits, based on lesson length and repertoire as agreed on with instructor.] K. Cassel, Mansell, S. Reist, Wang.

CLLO2100 - Cello (B.Mus.Arts and Integrated Studies Freshmen/Sophomores)Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. Open only to B.Mus.Arts and Integrated Studies majors. [2]

CLLO2200 - Cello (Performance Majors Freshmen/Sophomores)Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. Open only to freshman and sophomore performance majors.[4] Wang.

CLLO4100 - Cello (B.Mus.Arts and Integrated Studies Juniors/Seniors)Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. Open only to B.Mus.Arts and Integrated Studies juniors and seniors. [2] Wang.

CLLO4200 - Cello (Performance Majors Juniors/Seniors)Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. Open only to junior and senior performance majors.Prerequisite: successful completion of upper divisional hearing. [4] Wang.

CLAR1000 - Clarinet Performance ClassWeekly observation and participation. Required of all clarinet majors, B.Mus. and B.Mus.Arts. Offered on a pass/fail basis. [0] Jackson.

CLAR1100 - Clarinet (elective/ minor / second major)Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. New students by interview only. Fees apply to non-B.Mus./B.Mus.Arts students. [1-2 variable credits, based on lesson length and repertoire as agreed on with instructor.] Jackson, Lee.

CLAR2100 - Clarinet (B.Mus.Arts and Integrated Studies Freshmen/Sophomores)Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. Open only to B.Mus. and Integrated Studies majors. [2]

CLAR2200 - Clarinet (Performance Majors Freshmen/Sophomores)Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. Open only to freshman and sophomore performance majors.[4] Jackson.

CLAR4100 - Clarinet (B.Mus.Arts and Integrated Studies Juniors/Seniors)Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. Open only to B.Mus.Arts and Integrated Studies juniors and seniors. [2] Jackson.

CLAR4200 - Clarinet (Performance Majors Juniors/Seniors)Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. Open only to junior and senior performance majors.Prerequisite: successful completion of upper divisional hearing. [4] Jackson.

DRUM1100 - Drumset (elective credit)Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. New students by interview only. Fees apply to non-B.Mus./B.Mus.Arts students. [1-2 variable credits, based on lesson length and repertoire as agreed on with instructor.] D. Phillips.

EUPH1100 - Euphonium (elective/ minor / second major)Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. New students by interview only. Fees apply to non-B.Mus./B.Mus.Arts students. [1-2 variable credits, based on lesson length and repertoire as agreed on with instructor.] Long.

EUPH2100 - Euphonium (B.Mus.Arts and Integrated Studies Freshmen/Sophomores)Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. Open only to B.Mus.Arts and Integrated Studies majors. [2]

EUPH2200 - Euphonium (Performance Majors Freshmen/Sophomores)Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. Open only to freshman and sophomore performance majors.[4] Long.

EUPH4100 - Euphonium (B.Mus.Arts and Integrated Studies Juniors/Seniors)Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. Open only to B.Mus.Arts and Integrated Studies juniors and seniors. [2] Long.

EUPH4200 - Euphonium (Performance Majors Juniors/Seniors)Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. Open only to junior and senior performance majors.Prerequisite: successful completion of upper divisional hearing. [4] Long.

FDDL1100 - FiddleIndividual instruction focused on the art and practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. Open for elective credit. Fees apply to non-B.Mus.B.Mus.Arts students. [1-2 variable credits, based on lesson length and repertoire as agreed on with instructor.] Combs, Plohman.

FLUT1000 - Flute Performance ClassWeekly observation and participation. Required of all flute majors, B.Mus. and B.Mus.Arts. Offered on a pass/fail basis. [0] Barth.

FLUT1100 - Flute (elective/music minors/2nd majors)Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. New students by interview only. Fees apply to non-B.Mus./B.Mus.Arts students. [1-2 variable credits, based on lesson length and repertoire as agreed on with instructor.] Barth, Dunnavant.

FLUT2100 - Flute (B.Mus.Arts and Integrated Studies Freshmen/Sophomores)Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. Open only to B.Mus.Arts and Integrated Studies majors. [2]

FLUT2200 - Flute (Performance Majors Freshmen/Sophomores)Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. Open only to freshman and sophomore performance majors.[4] Barth.

FLUT4100 - Flute (B.Mus.Arts and Integrated Studies Juniors/Seniors)Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. Open only to B.Mus.Arts and Integrated Studies juniors and seniors. [2] Barth.

FLUT4200 - Flute (Performance Majors Juniors/Seniors)Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. Open only to junior and senior performance majors.Prerequisite: successful completion of upper divisional hearing. [4] Barth.

GTR1010 - Introduction to Guitar IA foundation in basic guitar technique that will prepare students for future studies in classical, jazz, or popular styles of guitar. Emphasis on chordal accompaniment, development of reading skills, improvisational techniques with melodies and chords. One 50-minute group lesson weekly. Fees apply to non-B.Mus./B.Mus.Arts students.[1] Kimbrough.

GTR1020 - Introduction to Guitar IIA foundation in basic guitar technique that will prepare students for future studies in classical, jazz, or popular styles of guitar. Emphasis on chordal accompaniment, development of reading skills, improvisational techniques with melodies and chords. One 50-minute group lesson weekly. Prerequisite: GTR 1010 or permission of instructor. Fees apply to non-B.Mus./B.Mus.Arts students. [1] Kimbrough.

GTR1030 - Fingerboard HarmonyIndividual instruction in advanced guitar skills: modal positions, modal patterns, score reading, arpeggios, transposition, and chord progressions. Fees apply to non-B.Mus. students. Prerequisite: GTR 1020 or permission of instructor. FALL, SPRING. [1-2 variable hours, based on lesson length as agreed on with instructor.]

GTR1100 - Guitar (elective/ minor / second major)Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. New students by interview only. Fees apply to non-B.Mus./B.Mus.Arts students. [1-2 variable credits, based on lesson length and repertoire as agreed on with instructor.] Todd.

HARP1000 - Harp Performance ClassWeekly observation and participation. Required of all harp majors, B.Mus. and B.Mus.Arts . Offered on a pass/fail basis. [0] Copely.

HARP1100 - Harp (elective/ minor / second major)Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. New students by interview only. Fees apply to non-B.Mus./B.Mus.Arts students. [1-2 variable credits, based on lesson length and repertoire as agreed on with instructor.] Agresta Copely.

HARP2100 - Harp (B.Mus.Arts and Integrated Studies Freshmen/Sophomores)Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. Open only to B.Mus.Arts and Integrated Studies majors. [2]

HARP2200 - Harp (Performance Majors Freshmen/Sophomores)Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. Open only to freshman and sophomore performance majors.[4] Shaffer.

HARP4100 - Harp (B.Mus.Arts and Integrated Studies Juniors/Seniors)Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. Open only to B.Mus.Arts and Integrated Studies juniors and seniors. [2] Agresta Copely.

HARP4200 - Harp (Performance Majors Juniors/Seniors)Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. Open only to junior and senior performance majors.Prerequisite: successful completion of upper divisional hearing. [4] Shaffer.

HRPS1100 - HarpsichordIndividual instruction focused on the art and practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. New students by interview only. Fees apply to non-B.Mus./B.Mus.Arts students [1-2 variable credit hours, based on lesson length and repertoire as agreed on with instructor]. Brecht.

HRPS1120 - Harpsichord ContinuoAccompanying repertoire from the 17th and 18th centuries. Topics include playing from figured and unfigured bass lines, playing simple 4-part exercises, and constructing inventive accompaniments. Recommended for harpsichord, organ, and collaborative piano students; audition required for non-keyboard majors. Concurrent enrollment in HRPS 1100 recommended.Performance Instruction: HornHORN1000 - Horn Performance ClassCourse DescriptionWeekly observation and participation. Required of all horn majors, B.Mus. and B.Mus.Arts. Offered on a pass/fail basis. [0] Norton.

HORN1000 - Horn Performance ClassWeekly observation and participation. Required of all horn majors, B.Mus. and B.Mus.Arts. Offered on a pass/fail basis. [0] Norton.

HORN1100 - Horn (elective/ minor / second major)Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. New students by interview only. Fees apply to non-B.Mus./B.Mus.Arts students. [1-2 variable credits, based on lesson length and repertoire as agreed on with instructor.] Norton.

HORN2100 - Horn (B.Mus.Arts and Integrated Studies Freshmen/Sophomores)Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. Open only to B.Mus.Arts and Integrated Studies majors. [2]

HORN2200 - Horn (Performance Majors Freshmen/Sophomores)Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. Open only to freshman and sophomore performance majors.[4] Norton

HORN4100 - Horn (B.Mus.Arts and Integrated Studies Juniors/Seniors)Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. Open only to B.Mus.Arts and Integrated Studies juniors and seniors. [2] Norton.

HORN4200 - Horn (Performance Majors Juniors/Seniors)Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. Open only to junior and senior performance majors.Prerequisite: successful completion of upper divisional hearing. [4] Norton

JAZZ1000 - Global Jazz ForumWeekly observation and participation. Required of all B.Mus. jazz studies majors and students enrolled in MUSE1310, 1320, or 1340. [0]

JAZZ1100 - Jazz Private InstructionPrivate instruction on standard jazz instruments and voice. Repertory and techniques chosen to meet individual needs. Open by audition. Private lesson fees apply to non-B.Mus./B.Mus.Arts students. May be repeated for credit. [Variable credit: 1-2 each semester. Multiple section enrollment possible. Students may accrue up to 6

JAZZ1150 - Jazz and Commercial ArrangingIndividual instruction in jazz and commercial arranging, content ranging from lead sheet writing to studio orchestra. Repertory and techniques chosen to meet individual needs. [1-2] Middagh

JAZZ1210 - Jazz Improvisation I: The Blues(Previously MUSO 1220) Introduction to the techniques of jazz improvisation. Development of basic performing technique with in-depth study of the blues form and its variations. [1]

JAZZ1220 - Jazz improvisation II: The Great American Songbook(Previously MUSO 1221) Intermediate study techniques for jazz improvisation. In-depth study of rhythm changes, the Great American Songbook, and jazz standards. Introduction to re-harmonization techniques.Prerequisite:JAZZ 1210 (Previously MUSO 1220). [1]

JAZZ1230 - Jazz Improvisation III: Post-bop and Beyond(Previously MUSO 1222) Advanced study in techniques for jazz improvisation. In-depth study of contemporary jazz compositions, structured- and free-forms, and original student compositions. Prerequisite: JAZZ 1210(previously MUSO 1220) and JAZZ 1220 (previously MUSO 1221). [1]

JAZZ2100 - Jazz (B.Mus. Jazz Studies First Years/Sophomores)Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. Open only to B.Mus. Jazz Studies majors.JAZZ4100 - Jazz (B.Mus. Jazz Studies Juniors/Seniors)Course DescriptionIndividual instruction focused on the art and practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. Open only to B.Mus. jazz studies majors juniors and seniors.Performance Instruction: MandolinMNDL1100 - MandolinCourse DescriptionIndividual instruction focused on the art and practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. Open for elective credit. Fees apply to non-B.Mus./B.Mus.Arts students. [1-2 variable credits, based on lesson length and repertoire as agreed on with instructor.] Pearcy Performance Instruction: Oboe

JAZZ4100 - Jazz (B.Mus. Jazz Studies Juniors/Seniors)Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. Open only to B.Mus. jazz studies majors juniors and seniors.Performance Instruction: MandolinMNDL1100 - MandolinCourse DescriptionIndividual instruction focused on the art and practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. Open for elective credit. Fees apply to non-B.Mus./B.Mus.Arts students. [1-2 variable credits, based on lesson length and repertoire as agreed on with instructor.] Pearcy Performance Instruction: Oboe

MNDL1100 - MandolinIndividual instruction focused on the art and practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. Open for elective credit. Fees apply to non-B.Mus./B.Mus.Arts students. [1-2 variable credits, based on lesson length and repertoire as agreed on with instructor.] Pearcy Performance Instruction: Oboe

OBOE1000 - Oboe Performance ClassWeekly observation and participation. Required of all oboe majors, B.Mus. and B.Mus.Arts. Offered on a pass/fail basis. [0] Jared Hauser.

OBOE1100 - Oboe (elective/ minor / second major)Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. New students by interview only. Fees apply to non-B.Mus./B.Mus.Arts students. [1-2 variable credits, based on lesson length and repertoire as agreed on with instructor.] Hauser, Wiesmeyer.

OBOE2100 - Oboe (B.Mus.Arts and Integrated Studies Freshmen/Sophomores)Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. Open only to B.Mus.Arts and Integrated Studies majors. [2]

OBOE2200 - Oboe (Performance Majors Freshmen/Sophomores)Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. Open only to freshman and sophomore performance majors.[4] Hauser.

OBOE4100 - Oboe (B.Mus.Arts and Integrated Studies Juniors/Seniors)Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. Open only to B.Mus.Arts and Integrated Studies juniors and seniors. [2] Hauser.

OBOE4200 - Oboe (Performance Majors Juniors/Seniors)Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. Open only to junior and senior performance majors.Prerequisite: successful completion of upper divisional hearing. [4] Hauser.

ORGN1100 - Organ (elective/ minor / second major)ndividual instruction focused on the art and practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. New students by interview only. Fees apply to non-B.Mus./B.Mus.Arts students. [1-2 variable credits, based on lesson length and repertoire as agreed on with instructor.] Brecht.

PERC1000 - Percussion Performance ClassWeekly observation and participation. Required of all percussion majors, B.Mus. and B.Mus.Arts. Offered on a pass/fail basis. [0] Jung.

PERC1010 - Introduction to PercussionBasic percussion techniques with emphasis on rolls, embellishments, sticking combinations, and their applications for concert and popular musical styles. Prerequisite: previous musical experience and an understanding of notation. One 50-minute group lesson weekly. Fees apply to non-B.Mus./B.Mus.Arts students.[1]

PERC1100 - Percussion (elective/ minor / second major)Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. New students by interview only. Fees apply to non-B.Mus./B.Mus.Arts students. [1-2 variable credits, based on lesson length and repertoire as agreed on with instructor.] Jung.

PERC2100 - Percussion (B.Mus.Arts and Integrated Studies Freshmen/Sophomores)Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. Open only to B.Mus.Arts and Integrated Studies majors. [2]

PERC2200 - Percussion (Performance Majors Freshmen/Sophomores)Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. Open only to freshman and sophomore performance majors.[4] Jung.

PERC4100 - Percussion (B.Mus.Arts and Integrated Studies Juniors/Seniors)Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. Specialized study in drumset, jazz vibraphone or contemporary marimba is available. Open only to B.Mus.Arts and Integrated Studies juniors and seniors; and for elective credit to Percussion Performance juniors and seniors. [2] Jung.

PERC4200 - Percussion (Performance Majors Juniors/Seniors)Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. Specialized study in drumset, jazz vibraphone or contemporary marimba is available. Open only to junior and senior performance majors. Prerequisite: successful completion of upper divisional hearing. [4] Jung.

PIAN1000 - Piano Performance ClassWeekly observation and participation. Required of all piano majors, B.Mus. and B.Mus.Arts. Offered on a pass/fail basis. [0] Dorfman, Krieger, Nies.

PIAN1010 - Introduction to Piano IA total-musicianship approach to the piano. Repertoire, technique, and sight reading are studied. Also includes the study of transposition, harmonization, and improvisation. One 50-minute group lesson weekly. Fees apply.Not open to B.Mus./B.Mus.Arts students. FALL, SPRING. [1]

PIAN1020 - Introduction to Piano IIA total-musicianship approach to the piano. Repertoire, technique, and sight reading are studied. Also includes the study of transposition, harmonization, and improvisation. One 50-minute group lesson weekly. Prerequisite: PIAN 1010 or permission of instructor. Fees apply. Not open to B.Mus./B.Mus.Arts students. FALL, SPRING. [1]

PIAN1030 - Early Intermediate Piano RepertoireStudents will learn classical piano repertoire along with popular songs that include keyboard concepts. Keyboard harmony and technique will be used to support the student's adventure through piano literature. A daily sight reading component will help build confidence in grand staff reading. Open to students who have completed MUKH 1131 or PIAN 1020. [1]

PIAN1100 - Piano (elective/ minor / second major)Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. New students by interview only. Fees apply to non-B.Mus./B.Mus.Arts students. [1-2 variable credits, based on lesson length and repertoire as agreed on with instructor.] Conner, Dorfman, Hwang, Krieger, Middleton, Nies, Reagan, Yang.

PIAN2100 - Piano (B.Mus.Arts and Integrated Studies Freshmen/Sophomores)Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. Open only to B.Mus.Arts and Integrated Studies majors. [2]

PIAN2200 - Piano (Performance Majors Freshmen/Sophomores)Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. Open only to freshman and sophomore performance majors.[4] Dorfman, Krieger, Nies.

PIAN4100 - Piano (B.Mus.Arts and Integrated Studies Juniors/Seniors)Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. Open only to B.Mus.Arts and Integrated Studies juniors and seniors. [2] Dorfman, Krieger, Nies.

PIAN4200 - Piano (Performance Majors Juniors/Seniors)Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. Open only to junior and senior performance majors.Prerequisite: successful completion of upper divisional hearing. [4] Dorfman, Krieger, Nies.

SAX1000 - Saxophone Performance ClassWeekly observation and participation. Required of saxophone majors, B.Mus. and B.Mus.Arts. Offered on a pass/fail basis. [0] Utley.

SAX1100 - Saxophone (elective/ minor / second major)Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. New students by interview only. Fees apply to non-B.Mus./B.Mus.Arts students. [1-2 variable credits, based on lesson length and repertoire as agreed on with instructor.] Utley.

SAX2100 - Saxophone (B.Mus.Arts and Integrated Studies Freshmen/Sophomores)Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. Open only to B.Mus.Arts and Integrated Studies majors. [2]

SAX2200 - Saxophone (Performance Majors Freshmen/Sophomores)Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. Open only to freshman and sophomore performance majors.[4] Utley.

SAX4100 - Saxophone (B.Mus.Arts and Integrated Studies Juniors/Seniors)Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. Open only to B.Mus.Arts and Integrated Studies juniors and seniors. [2] Utley.

SAX4200 - Saxophone (Performance Majors Juniors/Seniors)Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. Open only to junior and senior performance majors.Prerequisite: successful completion of upper divisional hearing. [4] Utley.

STPN1100 - Steel DrumIndividual instruction focused on the art and practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. Open for elective credit. Fees apply to non-B.Mus./B.Mus.Arts students. [1-2 variable credits, based on lesson length and repertoire as agreed on with instructor.] Britain.

TROM1000 - Trombone Performance ClassWeekly observation and participation. Required of all trombone majors, B.Mus. and B.Mus.Arts. Offered on a pass/fail basis. [0] Wilson.

TROM1100 - Trombone (elective/ minor / second major)Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. New students by interview only. Fees apply to non-B.Mus./B.Mus.Arts students. [1-2 variable credits, based on lesson length and repertoire as agreed on with instructor.] Wilson.

TROM2100 - Trombone (B.Mus.Arts and Integrated Studies Freshmen/Sophomores)Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. Open only to B.Mus.Arts and Integrated Studies majors. [2]

TROM2200 - Trombone (Performance Majors Freshmen/Sophomores)Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. Open only to freshman and sophomore performance majors.[4] Wilson.

TROM4100 - Trombone (B.Mus.Arts and Integrated Studies Juniors/Seniors)Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. Open only to B.Mus.Arts and Integrated Studies juniors and seniors. [2] Wilson.

TROM4200 - Trombone (Performance Majors Juniors/Seniors)Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. Open only to junior and senior performance majors.Prerequisite: successful completion of upper divisional hearing. [4] Wilson.

TRPT1000 - Trumpet Performance ClassWeekly observation and participation. Required of all trumpet majors, B.Mus. and B.Mus.Arts. Offered on a pass/fail basis. [0] Sibaja.

TRPT1100 - Trumpet (elective/ minor / second major)Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. New students by interview only. Fees apply to non-B.Mus./B.Mus.Arts students. [1-2 variable credits, based on lesson length and repertoire as agreed on with instructor.] Kunkee, Sibaja.

TRPT2100 - Trumpet (B.Mus.Arts and Integrated Studies Freshmen/Sophomores)Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. Open only to B.Mus.Arts and Integrated Studies majors. [2]

TRPT2200 - Trumpet (Performance Majors Freshmen/Sophomores)Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. Open only to freshman and sophomore performance majors.[4] Sibaja.

TRPT4100 - Trumpet (B.Mus.Arts and Integrated Studies Juniors/Seniors)Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. Open only to B.Mus.Arts and Integrated Studies juniors and seniors. [2] Sibaja.

TRPT4200 - Trumpet (Performance Majors Juniors/Seniors)Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. Open only to junior and senior performance majors.Prerequisite: successful completion of upper divisional hearing. [4] Sibaja.

TUBA1000 - Low Brass Performance ClassWeekly observation and participation. Required of all euphonium and tuba majors, B.Mus. and B.Mus.Arts.Offered on a pass/fail basis. [0] Long.

TUBA1100 - Tuba (elective/ minor / second major)Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. New students by interview only. Fees apply to non-B.Mus./B.Mus.Arts students. [1-2 variable credits, based on lesson length and repertoire as agreed on with instructor.] Long.

TUBA2100 - Tuba (B.Mus.Arts and Integrated Studies Freshmen/Sophomores)Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. Open only to B.Mus.Arts and Integrated Studies majors. [2]

TUBA2200 - Tuba (Performance Majors Freshmen/Sophomores)Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. Open only to freshman and sophomore performance majors.[4] Long.

TUBA4100 - Tuba (B.Mus.Arts and Integrated Studies Juniors/Seniors)Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. Open only to B.Mus.Arts and Integrated Studies juniors and seniors. [2] Long.

TUBA4200 - Tuba (Performance Majors Juniors/Seniors)Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. Open only to junior and senior performance majors.Prerequisite: successful completion of upper divisional hearing. [4] Long.

VLA1000 - Viola Performance ClassWeekly observation and participation. Required of all viola majors, B.Mus. and B.Mus.Arts. Offered on a pass/fail basis. [0] Kochanowski, Plummer.

VLA1010 - Viola for ViolinistsTechnical principles, practices, and strategies for violinists learning viola. Investigation of solo and chamber music repertoire; historical evolution of the viola. Viola provided. Prerequisite: Approval of violin instructor and course instructor. FALL, SPRING. [1] Plummer.

VLA1100 - Viola (elective/ minor / second major)Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. New students by interview only. Fees apply to non-B.Mus./B.Mus.Arts students. [1-2 variable credits, based on lesson length and repertoire as agreed on with instructor.]

VLA2100 - Viola (B.Mus.Arts and Integrated Studies Freshmen/Sophomores)Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. Open only to B.Mus. and Integrated Studies majors. [2]

VLA2200 - Viola (Performance Majors Freshmen/Sophomores)Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. Open only to freshman and sophomore performance majors.[4] Kochanowski, Plummer.

VLA4100 - Viola (B.Mus.Arts and Integrated Studies Juniors/Seniors)Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. Open only to B.Mus.Arts and Integrated Studies juniors and seniors. [2] Kochanowski, Plummer..

VLA4200 - Viola (Performance Majors Juniors/Seniors)Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. Open only to junior and senior performance majors.Prerequisite: successful completion of upper divisional hearing. [4] Kochanowski, Plummer.

VLN1000 - Violin Performance/Studio ClassWeekly observation and participation. Required of all violin majors, B.Mus. and B.Mus.Arts. Offered on a pass/fail basis. [0] Heard, Huebl, and Miahky.

VLN1100 - Violin (elective/ minor / second major)Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. New students by interview only. Fees apply to non-B.Mus./B.Mus.Arts students. [1-2 variable credits, based on lesson length and repertoire as agreed on with instructor.] Blackwell, Combs, Heard, Huebl, McGann, Miahky, Romero Ramos.

VLN2100 - Violin (B.Mus.Arts and Integrated Studies Freshmen/Sophomores)Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. Open only to B.Mus.Arts and Integrated Studies majors. [2]

VLN2200 - Violin (Performance Majors Freshmen/Sophomores)Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. Open only to freshman and sophomore performance majors.[4] Heard, Huebl, Miahky.

VLN4100 - Violin (B.Mus.Arts and Integrated Studies Juniors/Seniors)Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. Open only to B.Mus.Arts and Integrated Studies juniors and seniors. [2] Heard, Huebl, Miahky.

VLN4200 - Violin (Performance Majors Juniors/Seniors)Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. Open only to junior and senior performance majors.Prerequisite: successful completion of upper divisional hearing. [4] Heard, Huebl, Miahky.

VOIC1000 - Voice Performance ClassWeekly observation and participation. Required of all voice majors, B.Mus. and B.Mus.Arts. Offered on a pass/fail basis. [0] Voice faculty.

VOIC1010 - Introduction to Voice IVocal anatomy, fundamentals of breathing and healthy phonation, posture, performance anxiety, listening skills and dealing with tension. Appropriate for beginning singers who have never taken private voice lessons and are interested in Musical Theater, Pop Music, Commercial music, Opera, and other genres. Fees apply.VOIC1020 - Introduction to Voice IICourse DescriptionContinuation of VOIC 1010. Topics include range extension, how to learn vocal music, singing in foreign languages, projection, and preparing for choral auditions. Appropriate for beginning singers who have taken private vocal lessons, sung in ensembles, or are music majors interested in voice as a second instrument.Includes study of musical theater, pop music, commercial music, opera and other genres. Fees apply. This course is a prerequisite for VOIC 1100.VOIC1100 - Voice (elective/ minor / second major)Course DescriptionIndividual instruction focused on the art and practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. New students by interview only. Prerequisite is VOIC 1020.Fees apply to non-B.Mus./B.Mus.Arts students. [1-2 variable credits, based on lesson length and repertoire as agreed on with instructor.]

VOIC1020 - Introduction to Voice IIContinuation of VOIC 1010. Topics include range extension, how to learn vocal music, singing in foreign languages, projection, and preparing for choral auditions. Appropriate for beginning singers who have taken private vocal lessons, sung in ensembles, or are music majors interested in voice as a second instrument.Includes study of musical theater, pop music, commercial music, opera and other genres. Fees apply. This course is a prerequisite for VOIC 1100.VOIC1100 - Voice (elective/ minor / second major)Course DescriptionIndividual instruction focused on the art and practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. New students by interview only. Prerequisite is VOIC 1020.Fees apply to non-B.Mus./B.Mus.Arts students. [1-2 variable credits, based on lesson length and repertoire as agreed on with instructor.]

VOIC1100 - Voice (elective/ minor / second major)Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. New students by interview only. Prerequisite is VOIC 1020.Fees apply to non-B.Mus./B.Mus.Arts students. [1-2 variable credits, based on lesson length and repertoire as agreed on with instructor.]

VOIC2100 - Voice (B.Mus.Arts and Integrated Studies Freshmen/Sophomores)Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. Open only to B.Mus.Arts and Integrated Studies majors. [2]

VOIC2200 - Voice (Performance Majors Freshmen/Sophomores)Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. Open only to freshman and sophomore performance majors.[3] Jarman, Nelson, Shay.

VOIC4100 - Voice (B.Mus.Arts and Integrated Studies Juniors/Seniors)Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. Open only to B.Mus.Arts and Integrated Studies juniors and seniors. [2] Jarman, Nelson, Shay.

VOIC4200 - Voice (Performance Majors Juniors/Seniors)Individual instruction focused on the art and practice of the instrument, with emphasis on tone quality, technique, rhythm, interpretation, and literature. Open only to junior and senior performance majors.Prerequisite: successful completion of upper divisional hearing. [4] Jarman, Nelson, Shay.

PERS1101 - Elementary Persian IDevelopment of reading, listening, speaking, and writing skills. Not open to students who have earned credit for a more advanced Persian language course without permission. Credit hours will be reduced from most recent course taken (or from test or transfer credit) as appropriate. [3] (INT)

PERS1102 - Elementary Persian IIDevelopment of reading, listening, speaking, and writing skills. No credit for students who have earned credit for a more advanced Persian language course. Prerequisite: 1101. [3] (INT)

PHIL1001 - Commons iSeminarTopics vary. General Elective credit only. [1] (No AXLE credit)

PHIL1002 - Introduction to PhilosophyAn introduction to the basic problems of philosophy based upon readings in the works of selected leading philosophers. Repeat credit for students who have completed 1002W. [3] (HCA)

PHIL1002W - Introduction to PhilosophyAn introduction to the basic problems of philosophy based upon readings in the works of selected leading philosophers. Repeat credit for students who have completed 1002. [3] (HCA)

PHIL1003 - General LogicA study of the uses of language, definition, informal fallacies, the theory of the syllogism, the basic operations of modern symbolic logic, and selected issues in inductive logic and scientific method. Emphasis is placed on the ambiguities and pitfalls of ordinary usage and on techniques for translating ordinary arguments into formal logic. [3] (MNS)

PHIL1004 - Introduction to Asian PhilosophyPhilosophical thought of Asian origin, especially India and China, from ancient times to the present, theoretical and practical concerns. Repeat credit for students who have completed 1004W. [3] (INT)

PHIL1004W - Introduction to Asian PhilosophyPhilosophical thought of Asian origin, especially India and China, from ancient times to the present, theoretical and practical concerns. Repeat credit for students who have completed 1004. [3] (INT)

PHIL1005 - Introduction to EthicsA study of theories of the good life and of the nature of virtue. Readings in major texts and discussion of selected problems. Serves as repeat credit for PHIL 1005W. [3] (P)

PHIL1005W - Introduction to EthicsA study of theories of the good life and of the nature of virtue. Readings in major texts and discussion of selected problems. Serves as repeat credit for PHIL 1005. [3] (P)

PHIL1008 - Introduction to Medical EthicsMoral issues in the practice of medicine, biomedical research, policies and regulations related to health care.Repeat credit for students who have completed 1008W. [3] (P)

PHIL1008W - Introduction to Medical EthicsMoral issues in the practice of medicine, biomedical research, policies and regulations related to health care.Repeat credit for students who have completed 1008. [3] (P)

PHIL1100 - Introduction to Business EthicsEthical issues arising from business and professional practice. Topics will include: corporate social responsibility, employee rights, technology and privacy in the workplace, corporate governance, and globalization. [3] (P) PHIL1103 - Justice

Ethical issues arising from business and professional practice. Topics will include: corporate social responsibility, employee rights, technology and privacy in the workplace, corporate governance, and globalization. [3] (P) PHIL1103 - JusticeDifferent understandings of and debates concerning justice. Equality and freedom, individualism andcommunity, diversity, patriotism, and representation. [3] (HCA)

PHIL1111 - First-Year Writing SeminarIndependent learning and inquiry in an environment in which students can express knowledge and defend opinions through intensive class discussion, oral presentations, and written expression. May be repeated for credit once if there is no duplication of topic, but students may earn only up to 3 credits in any 1111 course per semester of enrollment. [3; maximum of 6 credits total for all semesters of 1111] (AXLE credit category varies by section)

PHIL1200 - The Meaning of LifeAccounts of life's meaning. The relations between ways of living, happiness, and the fact of death. The individual's role in giving meaning to life. Readings from Mill, Tolstoy, Kierkegaard, and several contemporary thinkers. Repeat credit for students who have completed 1200W. [3] (HCA)

PHIL1200W - The Meaning of LifeAccounts of life's meaning. The relations between ways of living, happiness, and the fact of death. The individual's role in giving meaning to life. Readings from Mill, Tolstoy, Kierkegaard, and several contemporary thinkers. Repeat credit for students who have completed 1200. [3] (HCA)

PHIL1865 - Civil War: Philosophical PerspectivesProblems in social and political philosophy as seen through the lens of the U.S. Civil War. Moral criteria for justifying secession and war, existential perspectives on mass death, ethical paradoxes of slaveholding in a democratic republic, meanings of race and nation, uses and abuses of history and memory. [3] (HCA)

PHIL2100 - Ancient PhilosophyAn examination of the major Greek and Roman philosophers with emphasis on the works of Plato and Aristotle.[3] (HCA)

PHIL2101 - Hellenistic and Late Ancient PhilosophyPhilosophical ideas of Stoics, Cynics, Epicureans, skeptics, Peripatetics, Neoplatonists, and early monotheist thinkers such as Philo, Origen, and Philoponus. [3] (HCA)

PHIL2102 - Medieval PhilosophyComparative study of key figures in Islamic, Jewish, and Christian philosophy as they struggle with the philosophy of logic, metaphysics, language, culture, politics, ethics, and nature. [3] (INT)

PHIL2103 - Modern PhilosophyAn examination of the major philosophers of modern Europe from Descartes and Spinoza through Locke,Berkeley, Hume, and Kant. [3] (HCA)

PHIL2104 - Nineteenth-Century PhilosophyA study of selected themes and writings from nineteenth-century European philosophers. [3] (INT)

PHIL2109 - Twentieth-Century Continental PhilosophyA study of selected twentieth-century philosophers such as Derrida, Foucault, and Lacan. [3] (HCA)

PHIL2110 - Contemporary PhilosophyAn examination of selected problems treated in recent philosophical literature such as meaning, perception, knowledge, truth, and freedom. Readings from the Anglo American analytical and the phenomenologicaltraditions. [3] (HCA)

PHIL2608 - Death and DyingDeath and dying. Ethical issues. Work on concepts central to ethical reasoning about life, dying, and death, and on topics such as end-of-life decision making, euthanasia, advance directives, allocation, and equipoise. [3]

PHIL2660 - Philosophy of MusicMusic and meaning, language, emotion, expression, interpretation, performance, the body, and politics. No musical background is required. [3] (HCA)

PHIL2661 - Philosophy of SportPhilosophical examination of sports, athletics, games, and play. Fairness, competition, cheating, aesthetics, embodiment, and doping. Role models, gender, exploitation, luck, and sports ethics. [3] (P)

PHIL2665 - Race and RacismRace and related concepts, including ethnicity, caste, class, gender, nation, and intersectionality.Discrimination, xenophobia, prejudice, bias, oppression, and privilege. [3] (P)

PHIL3003 - Formal Logic and Its ApplicationsA self-contained course designed to convey an understanding of the concepts of modern formal logic, to develop convenient techniques of formal reasoning, and to make some applications of them in one or more of the following: psychology, linguistics, structuralist studies, information and computer sciences, and the foundations of mathematics. Philosophy 1003 is not required. [3] (MNS)

PHIL3004 - Advanced Asian PhilosophyClassical Asian philosophical texts. Historical development of practices and ideas; translation and interpretation issues; comparisons with European and other traditions of thought. [3] (INT)

PHIL3005 - Jewish PhilosophyIntroduction to Jewish philosophy and the philosophical achievement of such major figures as Philo, Saadiah, Maimonides, Levinas, and selected contemporary thinkers. [3] (HCA)

PHIL3006 - Islamic PhilosophyIntroduction to the major figures of Islamic philosophy including Kindi, Razi, Farabi, Avicenna, and Ibn Khaldun.[3] (INT)

PHIL3007 - French FeminismIntroduction to the tradition of French feminist philosophy, including relevant works by Beauvoir, Cixous, Irigaray, Kristeva, LeDoeuff, Kofmann, and others. [3] (No AXLE credit)

PHIL3008 - American PhilosophyA study of the works of selected American philosophers from the colonial period to the present. [3] (US) PHIL3009 - Existential Philosophy

A study of the works of selected American philosophers from the colonial period to the present. [3] (US) PHIL3009 - Existential PhilosophyA study of two or three existential philosophers and selected problems that arise in relation to their thought. [3]

PHIL3010 - PhenomenologySelected readings from such thinkers as Husserl, Sartre, and Merleau-Ponty on the structures of experience, the sources and limits of knowledge, mind, and body, interpersonal relations, and the meaning of freedom. [3] (HCA) PHIL3011 - Critical Theory

Selected readings from such thinkers as Husserl, Sartre, and Merleau-Ponty on the structures of experience, the sources and limits of knowledge, mind, and body, interpersonal relations, and the meaning of freedom. [3] (HCA) PHIL3011 - Critical TheoryThe Frankfurt School; mass culture, ideology, and modernism in the arts; the disenchantment of reason; alienation and fascism; the prospects for experience and political critique. Readings include Adorno, Horkheimer, Marcuse, Benjamin, and Habermas. [3] (HCA)

PHIL3012W - Writing as Political ResistanceWritings from the political margins from authors under house arrest, in exile, or in prison. Expressions of active resistance to oppressive, and occasionally violent, political institutions. [3] (P)

PHIL3013 - History of AestheticsHistory of philosophy of art, aesthetic experience, creativity, criticism, and related concepts. [3] (HCA) PHIL3014 - Modernistic Aesthetics

History of philosophy of art, aesthetic experience, creativity, criticism, and related concepts. [3] (HCA) PHIL3014 - Modernistic AestheticsAbstraction, nontraditional media, mixed media, new media, changes in artistic institutions, and the death of art. [3] (HCA)

PHIL3103 - Immanuel KantKant's revolutionary critique of the foundations of human knowledge, moral obligation, and religious faith, with readings from his three Critiques and lesser works. [3] (HCA)

PHIL3104 - Kierkegaard and NietzscheA study of selected works. [3] (HCA)

PHIL3105 - HegelSelected works and themes. Experience, reason, freedom, history, and sociality. Modernity, dialectics, religion, and art. [3] (HCA)

PHIL3333 - Special OfferingTopics vary. [3]

PHIL3600 - Philosophy of KnowledgeNature, sources, and scope of scientific, moral, and religious belief. Justification, knowledge, and skeptical challenges to their legitimacy. [3] (HCA)

PHIL3601 - MetaphysicsSelected problems in metaphysics such as ultimate explanation, meaning of existence, time and eternity, freedom and determinism, and science and religion. [3] (HCA)

PHIL3602 - Philosophy of HistoryFocus on alternative conceptions of time and history in Aristotle, Augustine, Kant, Hegel, Heidegger, and Benjamin. [3] (HCA)

PHIL3603 - Philosophy of EducationAnalysis of educational concepts. Educational implications of theories of knowledge and theories of the individual. Emphasis on higher education. [3] (HCA)

PHIL3604 - Gender and SexualityRecent theories of the relation between sex, gender, and sexuality. Construction of gendered identities, and their relation to embodiment, gender politics, ethics and epistemology. [3] (P)

PHIL3605 - Contemporary Ethical TheoryPHIL3606 - Moral ProblemsCourse DescriptionA discussion of specific moral problems such as the justification of abortion and euthanasia. Moral theories such as utilitarianism will be discussed, but the emphasis will be on their relevance to the solution of moral problems.Repeat credit for students who have completed 3606W. Prerequisite: 1005. [3] (P)

PHIL3606 - Moral ProblemsA discussion of specific moral problems such as the justification of abortion and euthanasia. Moral theories such as utilitarianism will be discussed, but the emphasis will be on their relevance to the solution of moral problems.Repeat credit for students who have completed 3606W. Prerequisite: 1005. [3] (P)

PHIL3606W - Moral ProblemsA discussion of specific moral problems such as the justification of abortion and euthanasia. Moral theories such as utilitarianism will be discussed, but the emphasis will be on their relevance to the solution of moral problems.Repeat credit for students who have completed 3606. Prerequisite: 1005. [3] (P)

PHIL3607 - Philosophy of ReligionA study of various problems concerning religious experiences; ideas about religion and divinity. [3] (HCA) PHIL3608 - Ethics and Medicine

A study of various problems concerning religious experiences; ideas about religion and divinity. [3] (HCA) PHIL3608 - Ethics and MedicineSelected ethical issues raised by clinical practice, medical theories, and biomedical research and technology.Not open to students who have earned credit for PHIL 1111-03 without permission. Total credit for this course and PHIL 1111-03 will not exceed 3 credit hours. Credit hours reduced from second course taken (or from test or transfer credit) as appropriate. Prerequisite: 1005, 1008, or 1008W. [3] (P)

PHIL3609 - Ethics and BusinessMoral problems in the business world including irresponsible marketing, conflict between profit and social conscience, resource use, public regulation of business, and the value of competition. Prerequisite: 1005. [3] (P) PHIL3610 - Ethics and Law

Moral problems in the business world including irresponsible marketing, conflict between profit and social conscience, resource use, public regulation of business, and the value of competition. Prerequisite: 1005. [3] (P) PHIL3610 - Ethics and LawMoral problems in the practice of law including conflicts of interest, confidentiality, limits of advocacy, and the obligations of lawyers to clients, courts, and the public. Repeat credit for students who have completed 3610W.Prerequisite: 1005. [3] (SBS)

PHIL3610W - Ethics and LawMoral problems in the practice of law including conflicts of interest, confidentiality, limits of advocacy, and the obligations of lawyers to clients, courts, and the public. Repeat credit for students who have completed 3610.Prerequisite: 1005. [3] (SBS)

PHIL3611 - Environmental PhilosophyEnvironmental ethics (animal rights, respect for nature, the land ethic), science and the natural world, the aesthetics of nature, global justice, and sustainability. [3] (P)

PHIL3612 - Ethics and AnimalsEthical issues raised by human interactions with animals, including laboratory experiments, factory farming, hunting, zoos, and pet ownership. Challenges to ethical theory provoked by extending rights to animals. [3]

PHIL3615 - Philosophy of FilmChallenges posed by film forms to traditional aesthetics and the novel philosophical approaches created to deal with them. Topics include the nature of the film image, film and experiential time, cinematic genres, the problem of mass art, and feminist critiques of spectatorship. Weekly screenings. [3] (HCA)

PHIL3616 - Philosophy and the Natural SciencesPhilosophical issues in the methodology, conceptual structure, patterns of explanation, historical development, and cultural impact of the natural sciences. Metaphysical and ethical implications. [3] (P)

PHIL3617 - Philosophy of LanguagePhilosophical problems in the methodology of linguistics, relations between thought and language, theories of meaning and symbolism, the nature of metaphor, the philosophical implications of theories of language acquisition. [3] (SBS)

PHIL3618 - Philosophy and LiteraturePhilosophical topics in novels or poetry. Examples include: meaning of life, linguistic meaning, good and evil, aesthetic value, and human freedom. Repeat credit for students who have completed 3618W. [3] (HCA)

PHIL3618W - Philosophy and LiteraturePhilosophical topics in novels or poetry. Examples include: meaning of life, linguistic meaning, good and evil, aesthetic value, and human freedom. Repeat credit for students who have completed 3618. [3] (HCA)

PHIL3620 - Political and Social PhilosophyCentral issues and arguments concerning individual liberty, political authority, democracy, and justice. Key texts and arguments. Contemporary debates. [3] (P)

PHIL3621 - Early Modern Political PhilosophyA study of competing accounts of the best form of political association, which differ from Locke, through the works of Machiavelli, Hobbes, Spinoza, and Rousseau. [3] (INT)

PHIL3622 - Contemporary Political PhilosophyA focused and extended examination of selected topics in contemporary political theory, such as justice, liberty, rights, tolerance, and autonomy. Content varies depending on instructor. [3] (P)

PHIL3623 - Modern Philosophies of LawContemporary theories of legal validity, legal liability (criminal and civil), and contractual obligation with special attention to the controversy between legal positivism and "natural law" theories and the assessment of contemporary economic analyses of legal rights. [3] (SBS)

PHIL3630 - Philosophy of MindSelected problems in the philosophy of mind. Relation between mind and body, the nature of consciousness, the problem of other minds, the status of self-knowledge, and the possibility of machine and other intelligence.Connections with empirical investigations in related cognitive disciplines. [3] (SBS)

PHIL3635 - Ethics and Mental HealthUnderstandings of mental health. Impact on categorization and treatment of mental disorder. Ethical issues in mental health care contexts. Wider social contexts. [3] (P)

PHIL3657 - Humanity, Evolution, and GodThe impact of the idea of evolution on our conception of personhood. Theistic and non-theistic approaches to philosophical anthropology, ethics and society, the theory of knowledge, the mind-body problem, and relations with the environment and other species. [3] (P)

PHIL3661 - Topics in AestheticsPhilosophy of art and aesthetic theory. [3] (HCA)

PHIL3665 - Racial Justice LabApplication of philosophical race theory to concrete problems of racial justice. Collaborative, problem-centered exercise culminating in student-designed projects. Themes vary by semester. Offered on a graded basis only.[3] (P)

PHIL3851 - Independent ReadingsDesigned for majors not in the departmental honors program. Consists of a project to be carried out under the supervision of a member of the department. All projects must be approved by the department. May be repeated for a total of 12 credits in3851 and 3852 combined over a four semester period if there is no duplication in topic, but students may earn only up to 6 credits per semester of enrollment. [1-6; maximum of 12 credits total for four semesters of PHIL 3851 and 3852] (No AXLE credit)

PHIL3852 - Independent ReadingsDesigned for majors not in the departmental honors program. Consists of a project to be carried out under the supervision of a member of the department. All projects must be approved by the department. May be repeated for a total of 12 credits in 3851 and 3852 combined over a four semester period if there is no duplication in topic, but students may earn only up to 6 credits per semester of enrollment. [1-6; maximum of 12 credits total for four semesters of PHIL 3851 and 3852] (No AXLE credit)

PHIL3891 - Selected TopicsMay be repeated for credit more than once if there is no duplication in topic. Students may enroll in more than one section of this course each semester. [3] (No AXLE credit)

PHIL3892 - Selected TopicsMay be repeated for credit more than once if there is no duplication in topic. Students may enroll in more than one section of this course each semester. [3] (No AXLE credit) (No AXLE credit)

PHIL3900 - Figures in Philosophy[3] (HCA)

PHIL3903 - Kant's Theoretical PhilosophyImmanuel Kant's 1781/1787 Critique of Pure Reason in context of his earlier philosophy and broader system of philosophy. [3] (HCA)

PHIL3905 - History of Normative EthicsNormative ethics in Western philosophy, including eudaimonism, virtue ethics, deontology, utilitarianism, and care ethics. Historical texts and contemporary applications. [3] (HCA)

PHIL3910 - History of Philosophy[3] (HCA)

PHIL3920 - Topics in Philosophy[3] (HCA)

PHIL3922 - DemocracyDemocratic government: duty to vote, alternatives to full suffrage, the epistemic dimension of democratic authority, and various cognitive dysfunctions that democracy encourages. Readings from contemporary journal literature. [3] (HCA)

PHIL4999 - Honors Independent StudyDesigned for students in the Honors Program in philosophy. Consists of guided reading, periodic reports, and work on honors thesis. May be repeated for credit once, but students may earn only up to 6 credits per semester of enrollment. [3-6; maximum of 12 credits total for all semesters of PHIL 4999] (No AXLE credit) Physics

PHYS1001 - Commons iSeminarTopics vary. General Elective credit only. [1] (No AXLE credit)

PHYS1010 - Introductory PhysicsNormally accompanied by 1010L. Motion, forces, conservation laws, light, heat, and electricity. Quantum theory, the atomic nucleus, elementary particles, and properties of materials. Special relativity, Big Bang, and cosmology. Primarily intended for those who do not expect to major in science. [3] (MNS)

PHYS1020 - Physics for Future LeadersGeneral physics relevant to public policy. Energy and its generation; the greenhouse effect; light and radiation; nuclear fission and nuclear weapons; quantum mechanics and semiconductors; science on the internet;government funding of science. [3] (MNS)

PHYS1020L - Introductory Physics LaboratoryLaboratory to accompany 1020. Pre- or Corequisite: 1020. One three-hour laboratory per week. Satisfies the AXLE lab course requirement when completed with 1020. Offered on a graded basis only. [1] (No AXLE credit) PHYS1111 - First-Year Writing Seminar

Laboratory to accompany 1020. Pre- or Corequisite: 1020. One three-hour laboratory per week. Satisfies the AXLE lab course requirement when completed with 1020. Offered on a graded basis only. [1] (No AXLE credit) PHYS1111 - First-Year Writing SeminarIndependent learning and inquiry in an environment in which students can express knowledge and defend opinions through intensive class discussion, oral presentations, and written expression. May be repeated for credit once if there is no duplication of topic, but students may earn only up to 3 credits in any 1111 course per semester of enrollment. [3; maximum of 6 credits total for all semesters of 1111] (AXLE credit category varies by section)

PHYS1501 - Introductory Physics for the Life Sciences IPHYS1501L - Laboratory for Introductory Physics for the Life Sciences ICourse DescriptionLaboratory to accompany Physics 1501. Normally accompanied by 1501. Satisfies the AXLE lab courserequirement when completed with 1501 (strongly preferred) or 1601. Serves as repeat credit for PHYS 1601L.Not open to students who have earned credit for 1901 without permission. Credit for this course and 1901 will not exceed 5 credit hours. Credit reduced from second course taken (or test or transfer credit) as appropriate.[1] (No AXLE credit)

PHYS1501L - Laboratory for Introductory Physics for the Life Sciences ILaboratory to accompany Physics 1501. Normally accompanied by 1501. Satisfies the AXLE lab courserequirement when completed with 1501 (strongly preferred) or 1601. Serves as repeat credit for PHYS 1601L.Not open to students who have earned credit for 1901 without permission. Credit for this course and 1901 will not exceed 5 credit hours. Credit reduced from second course taken (or test or transfer credit) as appropriate.[1] (No AXLE credit)

PHYS1502 - Introductory Physics for the Life Sciences IINormally accompanied by 1502L. Calculus-based introduction to physics taught within the context of life science applications. Electricity and magnetism; geometric and physical optics; atomic, nuclear, and quantum physics.Prospective majors are strongly advised to take Math 1301 or a higher level calculus course. Prior study of calculus or concurrent enrollment in Math 1100, 1201, or 1301 is expected. Serves as repeat credit for PHYS1602. Not open to students who have earned credit for 1902 without permission. Credit for this course and 1902will not exceed 5 credit hours. Prerequisite: PHYS 1501. [3] (MNS)

PHYS1502L - Laboratory for Introductory Physics for the Life Sciences IILaboratory to accompany Physics 1502. Normally accompanied by 1502. Satisfies the AXLE lab courserequirement when completed with 1502 (strongly preferred) or 1602. Serves as repeat credit for PHYS 1602L.Not open to students who have earned credit for 1902 without permission. Credit for this course and 1902 will not exceed 5 credit hours. Credit reduced from second course taken (or test or transfer credit) as appropriate.[1] (No AXLE credit)

PHYS1601 - General Physics INormally accompanied by 1601L. Calculus-based introduction to general physics and its applications.Mechanics, heat, and sound. Potential majors are strongly advised to take MATH 1300 or a higher level calculus course. Prior study of calculus or concurrent enrollment in MATH 1200 or 1300 is expected. Serves as repeat credit for PHYS 1501. Not open to students who have earned credit for 1901 without permission. Credit for this course and 1901 will not exceed 5 hours. Credit reduced from second course taken (or test or transfer credit) as appropriate. [3] (MNS)

PHYS1601L - General Physics Laboratory ILaboratory to accompany Physics 1501 and Physics 1601. Normally accompanied by 1501 or 1601. Satisfies the AXLE lab course requirement when completed with 1501 or 1601. Serves as repeat credit for PHYS 1501L. Not open to students who have earned credit for 1901 without permission. Credit for this course and 1901 will not exceed 5 credit hours. Credit reduced from second course taken (or test or transfer credit) as appropriate. [1]

PHYS1602 - General Physics IINormally accompanied by 1602L. Calculus-based introduction to general physics and its applications. Electricity and magnetism, optics, modern physics. Potential majors are strongly advised to take MATH 1301 or a higher level calculus course. Prior study of calculus or concurrent enrollment in MATH 1201 or 1301 is expected. Serves as repeat credit for PHYS 1502. Not open to students who have earned credit for 1902 without permission.Credit for this course and 1902 will not exceed 5 hours. Credit reduced from second course taken (or test or transfer credit) as appropriate. [3] (MNS)

PHYS1602L - General Physics Laboratory IILaboratory to accompany Physics 1602. Normally accompanied by 1602. Satisfies the AXLE lab courserequirement when completed with 1602 (strongly preferred) or 1502. Serves as repeat credit for PHYS 1502L.Not open to students who have earned credit for 1902 without permission. Credit for this course and 1902 will not exceed 5 credit hours. Credit reduced from second course taken (or test or transfer credit) as appropriate.[1] (No AXLE credit)

PHYS1911 - Principles of Physics IClassical dynamics, conservation laws, gravitation, wave motion, and thermodynamics. Designed for first-year students who plan to major in physics or in related disciplines. Three lectures and a weekly discussion on modern topics of interest. Not open to students who have earned credit in PHYS 1501, 1601, 1901, or 2051without permission. Total credit for this course and PHYS 1501, 1601, or 2051 will not exceed 4 credit hours.Total credit for this course and PHYS 1901 will not exeed 5 credit hours. Credit reduced from second course taken (or test or transfer credit) as appropriate. Corequisite: MATH 1301. [4] (MNS)

PHYS1912 - Principles of Physics IIContinuation of 1911. Electromagnetism, optics, relativity, quantum mechanics, and atomic and nuclear physics.Designed for first-year students who plan to major in physics or in related disciplines. Three lectures and a weekly discussion on modern topics of interest. Not open to students who have earned credit in PHYS 1502, 1602, 1902, or 2053 without permission. Total credit for this course and PHYS 1502, 1602, or 2053 will not exceed 4 credit hours. Total credit for this course and PHYS 1902 will not exceed 5 credit hours. Credit reduced from second course taken (or test or transfer credit) as appropriate. Corequisite: MATH 2300 or 2500. [4] (MNS) PHYS1912L - Laboratory Skills for Physicists I

Designed for first-year students who plan to major in physics or in related disciplines. Three lectures and a weekly discussion on modern topics of interest. Not open to students who have earned credit in PHYS 1502, 1602, 1902, or 2053 without permission. Total credit for this course and PHYS 1502, 1602, or 2053 will not exceed 4 credit hours. Total credit for this course and PHYS 1902 will not exceed 5 credit hours. Credit reduced from second course taken (or test or transfer credit) as appropriate. Corequisite: MATH 2300 or 2500. [4] (MNS) PHYS1912L - Laboratory Skills for Physicists IFundamental laboratory skills and techniques. Experimental design, instrumentation, data handling and analysis, documentation, presentation of results. Prerequisite: 1501, 1601, 1911, or 2051. Corequisite: 1502, 1602, 1912, or 2053. [1] (No AXLE credit)

PHYS2210 - Classical and Modern OpticsGeometrical optics, including reflection, refraction, ray tracing, aberrations, and interference. Physical optics, including wave theory, absorption, dispersion, diffraction, and polarization. Properties of light from lasers and synchrotron sources. Photodetectors and optical technology. Prerequisite: either 1502 or 1602 or 1912; and either MATH 1201 or 1301. [3] (MNS)

PHYS2255 - Modern Physics and the Quantum WorldRelativity. Experimental basis of quantum physics. Structure of the atom. Wave properties of matter. The hydrogen atom. Atomic and statistical physics. Prerequisite: either 1502, 1602, 1902 (or 1912), or 2053.Corequisite: MATH 2300 or 2500. [3] (MNS)

PHYS2255L - Laboratory Skills for Physicists IIFundamental laboratory skills and techniques. Experimental design, instrumentation, data handling and analysis, documentation, presentation of results. Prerequisite: 1502, 1602, 1912, or 2053; and 1912L or one of 1501L or 1601L and one of 1502L or 1602L. Corequisite: 2255 or 3651. [1] (No AXLE credit)

PHYS2275 - Classical MechanicsCalculus of variations. Lagrangian and Hamiltonian dynamics. Conservation laws. Vector algebra and coordinate transformations. Gravity and potential energy. Free, forced, damped, and nonlinear harmonic oscillations. The anharmonic oscillator and chaos. Orbital and rotational angular momentum. Gravitational and Coulomb central-force problems. Motion in non-inertial reference frames. Coupled oscillators and normal modes. Rigid-body motion. Continuous systems and the wave equation. Serves as repeat credit for PHYS 2270 and 2271.Prerequisite: 2255 or 3651. [3] (MNS)

PHYS2290 - Electricity, Magnetism, and Electrodynamics IElectrostatic fields and potentials. Gauss's law. Electrical properties of insulators, semiconductors, and metals.The Lorentz force. Magnetic fields and forces. Electromagnetic induction, Maxwell's equations, andelectromagnetic waves. Prerequisite: 2255 or 3651; and either MATH 2400, 2420, or 2610. [3] (MNS)

PHYS2291 - Electricity, Magnetism, and Electrodynamics IIElectromagnetic waves in dielectrics and conductors. Electromagnetic radiation in waveguide structures.Relativistic electrodynamics. Magnetism as a relativistic phenomenon. Prerequisite: 2290. [3] (MNS)

PHYS2300 - Quantum ComputationAlgorithms, error correction, and cryptography. Physics of information processing, quantum logic. Shor's factoring algorithm and Grover's search algorithm. Quantum circuits, measurements, entanglement, and teleportation. No-cloning and no-deleting theorems. Prerequisite: Math 1300. (MNS) [3]

PHYS2660 - Experimental Nanoscale Fabrication and CharacterizationLaboratory course introduction to nanofabrication and characterization. Independent and original research in nanotechnology and nanoscience. Nanomaterials, nanoelectronics, and photonics. [3] (MNS)

PHYS2953L - Advanced Physics Laboratory: Introduction to Experimental ResearchFundamental physics experiments and measurements. Statistical analysis of measured data. One laboratory per week. Prerequisite: 2255L, and either 2255 or 3651; or 1912 and either 2255 or 3651; or either 2250W or 2260W. [1] (No AXLE credit)

PHYS3122 - Physics of Living SystemsPhysical principles applied to biological phenomena. Development of physical models of biological systems on scales ranging from molecules to organisms. Biological applications of mechanics, thermodynamics, and dynamical systems. Prerequisite: 1502, 1602, 1912, or 2053; and MATH 2400, 2420, or 2610. [3] (MNS)

PHYS3125 - Health PhysicsTheory and instrumentation in health physics and radiological physics. Radiation shielding design, methods of external and internal dosimetry, and radiation regulatory issues. Prerequisite: 2255 and either Math 1201 or 1301. [3] (MNS)

PHYS3200 - Statistical PhysicsTemperature, work, heat, and the first law of thermodynamics. Entropy and the second law of thermodynamics.Kinetic theory of gases with applications to ideal gases and electromagnetic radiation. Serves as repeat credit for students who have completed 3207. Prerequisite or corequisite: 2270 or 2275. [3] (MNS)

PHYS3600 - Seminar in Presenting Physics ResearchIntroduction, instruction, and practice in skills for presenting scientific research results. May be repeated for credit once, but students may earn only 1 credit per semester of enrollment and may count only 1 credit toward the major or minor in physics. Prerequisite: major or minor in Physics; and 2255 or 3651. [1] (No AXLE credit) PHYS3640 - Physics of Condensed Matter

Introduction, instruction, and practice in skills for presenting scientific research results. May be repeated for credit once, but students may earn only 1 credit per semester of enrollment and may count only 1 credit toward the major or minor in physics. Prerequisite: major or minor in Physics; and 2255 or 3651. [1] (No AXLE credit) PHYS3640 - Physics of Condensed MatterCrystal structure and diffraction. Phonons and lattice vibrations. Free-electron theory of metals. Elementary band theory of solids. Semiconductors. Optical properties of insulators. Applications to solid-state devices, magnetism, and superconductivity. Prerequisite: 2275 and 3200. Corequisite: 2255. [3] (MNS)

PHYS3645 - Radiation Detectors and MeasurementBasic physics principles and applications of radiation detecting instruments, with laboratory exercises.Techniques and instrumentation for nuclear radiation detection and measurements as they relate to health physics (radiation safety) and nuclear physics. Prerequisite: 2255 or 3125. [4] (MNS)

PHYS3651 - Quantum Mechanics IWave-particle duality, indeterminacy, superposition, the Schr√∂dinger equation, angular momentum, the hydrogen atom, and spin and indistinguishability. Prerequisite: 2255; and Mathematics: MATH 2400; or one of (MATH 2410, 2600, 2501) and one of (MATH 2420, 2610). [3] (MNS)

PHYS3652 - Quantum Mechanics IITime-independent and time-dependent perturbation theory, matrix theory, scattering, applications to atomic physics, condensed matter physics, and astrophysics. Prerequisite: 2290 and 3651. [3] (MNS)

PHYS3660 - Introduction to Particle PhysicsWeak, strong, and electromagnetic forces as evidenced by the interactions of elementary particles.Classification of particles and experimental techniques. Corequisite: 2255 or 3651. [3] (MNS)

PHYS3790 - Computational PhysicsTopics in modern physics analyzed exclusively with computer programs. Finite difference approaches to the Schr√∂dinger and Maxwell equations. Solutions of nonlinear equations. Molecular dynamics. Monte Carlo simulations. Growth models and random walks. Serves as repeat credit for PHYS 2237. Prerequisite: Any three of 2255, 2275, 2290, 3200, 3651. [3] (MNS)

PHYS3820 - Methods in Physics Laboratory TeachingDeveloping and running physics labs and classroom lecture demonstrations. Understanding safety protocols.Enrollment open only to students who are Secondary Education, Elementary Education, or Education Studies majors, are also either Physics majors or minors, and who have completed any 12 credit hours in satisfaction of requirements for major or minor in Physics. [3] (MNS)

PHYS3850 - Undergraduate ResearchResearch and scholarly investigation or directed readings in physics under close supervision of sponsoring faculty member. Enrollment by arrangement with sponsoring faculty member and approval of director of undergraduate studies. May be repeated for credit, for a total of no more than 10 total credit hours and for no more than 5 credit hours per semester. [1-5] (No AXLE credit)

PHYS3890 - Selected Topics[1-3] (No AXLE credit)

PHYS4005 - Mathematical Methods for PhysicistsLinear spaces and operators; matrix algebra; differential equations; Green's function; and complex analysis.Variational calculus; perturbation methods; group theory. Prerequisite: 2275, 2290; and one of MATH 2400, 2420, or 2610. [3] (MNS)

PHYS4998 - Honors Research and Senior ThesisIndependent experimental or theoretical investigations of basic problems in physics under faculty supervision, culminating in a written thesis submitted and an oral defense presented to a departmental faculty examination committee. Required for departmental honors in Physics. Enrollment by arrangement with sponsoring faculty member and approval of director of undergraduate studies. May be repeated for a total of 10 credits, but students may earn only up to 6 credits per semester of enrollment. Prerequisite: major in Physics, junior or senior standing. [1-6] (No AXLE credit)

PSCI1001 - Commons iSeminarTopics vary. General Elective credit only. [1] (No AXLE credit)

PSCI1100 - Introduction to American Government and PoliticsA descriptive survey of the constitutional and structural principles, processes, and functions of the American governmental system. [3] (US)

PSCI1101 - Introduction to Comparative PoliticsDemocracy, communism, and authoritarian rule in developed and developing countries; political institutions and public policy in diverse national settings; principles of comparative analysis. [3] (SBS)

PSCI1102 - Introduction to International PoliticsSignificant patterns and trends in twentieth-and twenty-first-century world politics: modes of conducting relations among nations, instruments for promoting national and supranational interests, and controls over international disputes. Emphasis upon episodes throwing light on the causes of war and the conditions of peace.[3] (SBS)

PSCI1103 - JusticeDifferent understandings of and debates concerning justice. Equality and freedom, individualism andcommunity, diversity, patriotism, and representation. [3] (HCA)

PSCI1111 - First-Year Writing SeminarIndependent learning and inquiry in an environment in which students can express knowledge and defend opinions through intensive class discussion, oral presentations, and written expression. May be repeated for credit once if there is no duplication of topic, but students may earn only up to 3 credits in any 1111 course per semester of enrollment. [3; maximum of 6 credits total for all semesters of 1111] (AXLE credit category varies by section)

PSCI1150 - U.S. ElectionsExamination of the presidential and congressional elections. The recruitment of candidates, nomination processes, financing campaigns, media coverage, polling, predictive models, and implications of results. (during presidential election years). [3] (US)

PSCI2170 - ROCCA Lab I: Collaborative Research SkillsBasics of research design and social science communication. Participate in collaborative research projects under faculty supervision in the ROCCA Lab. Not open to students who have earned credit for 3895 section 01 offered spring 2020. Requires application to instructor. [3] (SBS)

PSCI2171 - ROCCA Lab II: Quantitative ReasoningThe intuition of quantitative reasoning. Collaborative research under faculty supervision in the ROCCA Lab. Not open to students who have completed 3895 section 01 offered spring 2020. Requires application to instructor.[3] (SBS)

PSCI2201 - Power and ResistanceModern and contemporary political theories of power and resistance. Disciplinary power, biopower, sovereign power, and economic power. Law, violence, and revolution. [3] (HCA)

PSCI2202 - Ancient Political ThoughtGreek and Roman political traditions. Plato, Aristotle, Cicero, and early Christian thinkers. Questions of justice, equality, democracy, and political knowledge. Prerequisite or corequisite: 1100, 1101, 1102, 1103, or 1150. [3]

PSCI2203 - History of Modern Political PhilosophyIntensive analysis of the principal political philosophers in the modern tradition. Prerequisite or corequisite: 1100, 1101, 1102, 1103, or 1150. [3] (HCA)

PSCI2204W - American Political ThoughtAn analytical study of American political theories and their impact upon our political institutions. Prerequisite or corequisite: 1100, 1101, 1102, 1103, or 1150. [3] (US)

PSCI2205 - Contemporary Political TheoryDebates in contemporary political thought. Justice, democracy, freedom, identity, and individualism. Includes emerging contemporary theories. Prerequisite or corequisite: 1100, 1101, 1102, 1103, or 1150. [3] (HCA) PSCI2207 - Liberalism and Its Critics

Debates in contemporary political thought. Justice, democracy, freedom, identity, and individualism. Includes emerging contemporary theories. Prerequisite or corequisite: 1100, 1101, 1102, 1103, or 1150. [3] (HCA) PSCI2207 - Liberalism and Its CriticsThe liberal tradition in political theory and its major challengers. Critical debates surrounding the relationship between individuals and political community, rights, freedom and equality. Repeat credit for students who have completed 2207W. Prerequisite or corequisite: 1100, 1101, 1102, 1103, or 1150. [3] (HCA)

PSCI2207W - Liberalism and Its CriticsThe liberal tradition in political theory and its major challengers. Critical debates surrounding the relationship between individuals and political community, rights, freedom and equality. Repeat credit for students who have completed 2207. Prerequisite or corequisite: 1100, 1101 1102, 1103, or 1150. [3] (HCA)

PSCI2208 - Law, Politics, and JusticePSCI2209 - Issues in Political TheoryCourse DescriptionTopics vary from semester to semester. May be repeated once if there is no overlap with previous offerings.Prerequisite: 2202, 2203, or 2205. [3] (No AXLE credit)

PSCI2209 - Issues in Political TheoryTopics vary from semester to semester. May be repeated once if there is no overlap with previous offerings.Prerequisite: 2202, 2203, or 2205. [3] (No AXLE credit)

PSCI2210 - West European PoliticsAnalysis of political development, social forces, institutions, and public policy in Great Britain, France, Germany, Italy, and Sweden. Prerequisite or corequisite: 1100, 1101, 1102, 1103, or 1150. [3] (INT)

PSCI2211 - Terrorism and Intrastate ConflictIntrastate conflict and terrorism. Political violence. Organizational economics of militant groups; strategies for counterinsurgency. Data explorations and quantitative analyses. Offered on a graded basis only. No credit for students who have earned credit for 3895 section 02 offered fall 2018 or 3895 section 01 offered fall 2017.Prerequisite: 1100, 1101, 1102, 1103, or 1150. [3] (SBS)

PSCI2212W - Populism in Europe and BeyondRise of populist parties in advanced democracies. Theoretical and conceptual questions underlying the nature of populism. Right-wing populist parties from programs and voter base to organization and party leadership. Not open to students who have earned credit for 3894 section 01 offered fall 2019, or for EUS 2240 section 02offered fall 2018, or for EUS 2240 section 01 offered spring 2018, or for 3895 section 01 offered spring 2017. [3]

PSCI2213 - Democratization and Political DevelopmentComparative study of political development, with a focus on institutions. The effect of political choices about voting systems, executive and legislative powers, cabinet formation, and other institutions on political competition, parties and government stability. Cases from established democracies and countries undergoing democratization. Prerequisite or corequisite: 1100, 1101, 1102, 1103, or 1150. [3] (SBS)

PSCI2214 - Democratic Erosion in Comparative PerspectiveComparative study of democratic erosion with a focus on democratic decline in the twenty-first century.Characteristics of modern democratic regimes. Causes and consequences of democratic erosion. Corruption, disinformation ("fake news"), inequality, polarization, and populism. Prerequisite: 1100, 1101, 1102, 1103, or 1150. [3] (SBS)

PSCI2215 - Change in Developing CountriesComparative study of political and economic change in developing countries. Political implications of ethnicity, economic dependency, and environmental degradation. Prerequisite or corequisite: 1100, 1101, 1102, 1103, or 1150. [3] (SBS)

PSCI2216 - The Chinese Political SystemGovernmental institutions and political processes in the People's Republic of China with emphasis upon the interaction of traditional and revolutionary elements. Some attention to Taiwan since 1950 and to the overseas Chinese as parts of the Chinese political universe. Prerequisite or corequisite: 1100, 1101, 1102, 1103, or 1150.[3] (INT)

PSCI2217 - Development in South AsiaPolitical economy of development in South Asian countries, with a focus on India, Pakistan, and Bangladesh.Democracy, growth, poverty, inequality, education, health, and gender equity. Offered on a graded basis only.No credit for students who have earned credit for 3894-01 offered fall 2016, fall 2017, or fall 2018. [3] (SBS) PSCI2219 - Politics of Mexico

No credit for students who have earned credit for 3894-01 offered fall 2016, fall 2017, or fall 2018. [3] (SBS) PSCI2219 - Politics of MexicoA survey of contemporary Mexican politics from a comparative perspective. Interaction of economic, social, and political forces that led to the demise of one of the world's most durable one-party political regimes and the prolonged transition to democracy. Prerequisite or corequisite: 1100, 1101, 1102, 1103, or 1150. [3] (SBS) PSCI2220 - Crisis Diplomacy

A survey of contemporary Mexican politics from a comparative perspective. Interaction of economic, social, and political forces that led to the demise of one of the world's most durable one-party political regimes and the prolonged transition to democracy. Prerequisite or corequisite: 1100, 1101, 1102, 1103, or 1150. [3] (SBS) PSCI2220 - Crisis DiplomacyForeign policy decision making and strategy. Emphasis on differences between crises that lead to war and those that do not. Foreign relations of Britain, France, Germany, Russia, and Japan. Prerequisite or corequisite: 1100, 1101, 1102, 1103, or 1150. [3] (SBS)

PSCI2221 - Causes of WarScientific study of the onset of expansion and consequences of war; conditions of peace, emphasizing alliances, arms races, and crisis escalation. Prerequisite or corequisite: 1100, 1101, 1102, 1103, or 1150. [3] (SBS) PSCI2222 - American Foreign Policy

Scientific study of the onset of expansion and consequences of war; conditions of peace, emphasizing alliances, arms races, and crisis escalation. Prerequisite or corequisite: 1100, 1101, 1102, 1103, or 1150. [3] (SBS) PSCI2222 - American Foreign PolicyCritical analysis of major international and domestic factors shaping U.S. foreign relations as reflected in selected twentieth- and twenty-first-century experiences. Not open to students who have earned credit for PSCI 1111-01 without permission. Total credit for this course and PSCI 1111-01 will not exceed 3 credit hours. Credit hours reduced from second course taken (or from test or transfer credit) as appropriate. Prerequisite or corequisite: 1100, 1101, 1102, 1103, or 1150. [3] (SBS)

PSCI2223 - European Political Economy and Economic InstitutionsPolicy-making processes of key economic institutions that influence the global political economy. International and financial regulatory reforms. World Trade Organization negotiations and current European economic issues.Prerequisite or corequisite: 1100, 1101, 1102, 1103, or 1150. [3] (SBS)

PSCI2224W - Gender and PoliticsGender inequality; political representation; women and politics. Not open to students who have earned credit for 3894 section 02 offered spring 2020, 3894 section 02 offered spring 2018. [3] (SBS)

PSCI2225 - International Political EconomySurvey of major issues involving the interaction of political and economic forces at the global level. Particular attention to theories of interdependence and imperialism, the position of developing countries in the international system, multinational corporations, and the economic origins of war. Prerequisite or corequisite: 1100, 1101, 1102, 1103, or 1150. [3] (SBS)

PSCI2226 - International Law and OrganizationThe role of international law and international organizations in the contemporary global political system. Focus on the evolution and impact of international law, the United Nations, the International Monetary Fund (IMF), and selected regional organizations. Prerequisite or corequisite: 1100, 1101, 1102, 1103, or 1150. [3] (SBS) PSCI2228W - The Political Economy of Gender

The role of international law and international organizations in the contemporary global political system. Focus on the evolution and impact of international law, the United Nations, the International Monetary Fund (IMF), and selected regional organizations. Prerequisite or corequisite: 1100, 1101, 1102, 1103, or 1150. [3] (SBS) PSCI2228W - The Political Economy of GenderFemale labor force participation; women's political representation; gender equality. Not open to students who have earned credit for PSCI 3894 section 01 offered spring 2020. [3] (SBS)

PSCI2230 - Middle East PoliticsCross-national analysis of political institutions, political economies, and processes of change in the Middle East.Prerequisite or corequisite: 1100, 1101, 1102, 1103, or 1150. [3] (SBS)

PSCI2231 - The Politics of AutocracyContemporary autocracy, broadly construed. How regimes come to power; institutional choices leaders make and their implications for other outcomes such as citizen welfare and prospects for democratization. Serves as repeat credit for PSCI 3894, section 02 in Fall 2021. [3] (SBS)

PSCI2235 - The United States MilitaryStructure and culture of the U.S. military across all branches. Policy issues related to the armed forces. The soldier and military in art and popular culture. [3] (US)

PSCI2236 - The Politics of Global InequalityCauses of international inequality in the distribution of wealth. The emergence of rich and poor nations, and rich and poor people. Factors related to economic development, and their impact on income distribution.Prerequisite or corequisite: 1100, 1101, 1102, 1103, or 1150. [3] (SBS)

PSCI2237 - African PoliticsPre-colonial to the present. State-building, socioeconomic development, public service provision, and foreign interventions. Conflict including: separatism, insurgency, slavery, genocide, and gender-based violence. Rise of democracy including party systems, voting behavior, electoral competition, fraud. Identity politics of ethnicity, gender, class, and clash of Western and local norms. Offered on a graded basis only. Prerequisite or corequisite: 1100, 1101, 1102, 1103, or 1150. [3] (SBS)

PSCI2238 - Identity Politics in the Non-Western WorldCauses and consequences of the politics of racial and ethnic identities across the developing world. Ethnic politics, affirmative action, immigration, urbanization, and violent conflict. [3] (SBS)

PSCI2239 - Ethnic PoliticsEffect of ethnic identity and ethnic heterogeneity on political phenomena such as elections, violence, party formation, democracy, development. Effect of political phenomenon on ethnic identity activation and change in ethnic categories and heterogeneity. [3] (SBS)

PSCI2240 - Political PartiesTheories of party formation, organization, and behavior. Historical development of party systems. Criteria for the comparative evaluation of party systems. Parties as instruments of citizen control. Implications for electoral outcomes, coalition formation, legislative decision making, and public policy. Prerequisite or co-requisite: 1100, 1101, 1102, 1103, or 1150. [3] (SBS)

PSCI2240W - Political PartiesTheories of party formation, organization, and behavior. Historical development of party systems. Criteria for the comparative evaluation of party systems. Parties as instruments of citizen control. Implications for electoral outcomes, coalition formation, legislative decision making, and public policy. Prerequisite or corequisite: 1100, 1101, 1102, 1103, or 1150. Serves as repeat credit for students who have completed 2240. [3] (SBS)

PSCI2241 - U.S. State GovernmentsDescription Influence of U.S. state governments in daily life. Constitutional framework surrounding federalism vis-a-vis structures of state governing bodies. Electoral systems. Representation by the three branches of government. Public policymaking on the state level. [3] (SBS)

PSCI2242W - Inter-branch Policy-making in the United StatesPolicy-making in the United States by all three branches of government. Political conflict between Congress, the president, executive branch agencies, and the courts. Inter-branch bargaining over public policy. [3] (SBS) PSCI2243 - Political Campaigns and the Electoral Process

Policy-making in the United States by all three branches of government. Political conflict between Congress, the president, executive branch agencies, and the courts. Inter-branch bargaining over public policy. [3] (SBS) PSCI2243 - Political Campaigns and the Electoral ProcessTheories of representation and democratic accountability; electoral strategies and tactics, including political polling and analysis. Prerequisite or corequisite: 1100, 1101, 1102, 1103, or 1150. [3] (SBS)

PSCI2244W - Congress, the President, and Public SchoolsPolitical mechanisms driving education policy. Federalism, separation of church and state, organized interests, teachers, testing and accountability, school choice, grants-in-aid, school lunches, desegregation, and education of children with disabilities. Serves as repeat credit for students who completed 3893-04 in spring 2022.Prerequisite: 1100, 1101, 1102, 1103, or 1150. [3] (SBS)

PSCI2245 - The American PresidencyConstitutional, historical, and political aspects. Attention to electing and nominating president, presidential leadership and personality, governing, and relations with Congress and the public. Prerequisite or corequisite: 1100, 1101, 1102, 1103, or 1150. [3] (US)

PSCI2246W - Civil Conflict and CiviliansRegional case studies of territorial jurisdiction, succession, natural resources, colonial legacies, and sociopolitical identities. Criminal conflict in Mexico; intervention in El Salvador and Guatemala; African civil wars; and failed uprisings in the Middle East. Social movements and out-migration. Causes, duration, and consequences of civil conflicts. [3] (SBS)

PSCI2249 - Elections and Voting Around the WorldComparative analysis of elections. Theories of representation, voter turnout, voter choice, and campaign dynamics. [3] (SBS)

PSCI2251 - The Politics of U.S. and Global ImmigrationPolitical, philosophical, and moral issues. Prerequisite or corequisite: 1100, 1101, 1102, 1103, or 1150. [3] (INT) PSCI2252 - The Politics of Migration Across the Americas

Political, philosophical, and moral issues. Prerequisite or corequisite: 1100, 1101, 1102, 1103, or 1150. [3] (INT) PSCI2252 - The Politics of Migration Across the AmericasCross-national analysis of migration trends. Political causes and consequences of migration. Immigration and asylum policies across Americas; focus on U.S., Mexico, Central America, Venezuela. Prerequisite or corequisite: PSCI 1100, 1101, 1102, or 1103 [3] (SBS)

PSCI2253 - Public AdministrationWhat administrative agencies do and why. Effective management in the public sector, including public budgeting, implementation, personnel management, and communication with the public and the press. Serves as repeat credit for PSCI 3893-03 in Spring 2017 and PSCI 3893-01 in Fall 2015. [3] (SBS)

PSCI2254W - Research on Immigrant NashvilleImmigration and refugee policy. Political, legal, and social aspects of refugee/immigrant communities in Nashville. Prerequisite: PSCI 1100, 1101, 1102, 1103, or 1150. [3] (SBS)

PSCI2255 - Public Policy ProblemsSpecific problems of public policies and their relations to political and institutional structures. Particular policy problems vary from semester to semester. May be repeated for credit more than once if there is no duplication in topic. Students may enroll in more than one section of this course each semester. Prerequisite or corequisite: 1100, 1101, 1102, 1103, or 1150. [3] (No AXLE credit)

PSCI2256 - Politics of Public PolicyUnderstanding and navigating the policy process. Public opinion, media, elections, interest groups, and agenda settings. Legislatures, executives, decision making, implementation, and policy feedback. Current policy issues.Prerequisite or corequisite: 1100, 1101, 1102, 1103, or 1150. [3] (SBS)

PSCI2259 - Political Strategy and Game TheoryCampaigns and elections, legislative politics, political bargaining, and political organization. Applications of decision and game theory. Models of complete and perfect information, and games of incomplete information.Prerequisite or corequisite: 1100, 1101, 1102, 1103, or 1150. [3] (SBS)

PSCI2262 - The Judicial ProcessFunctioning of the judiciary in the American political process; operation and powers of the courts; non-legal aspects of the judicial process; political role and effects of judicial decisions. Prerequisite or corequisite: 1100, 1101, 1102, 1103, or 1150. [3] (SBS)

PSCI2263 - Religion and PoliticsReligion in modern societies. Faith and civic culture, religion's presence in the public square, religion and colonialism, abortion, gay marriage, faith-based initiatives. Historical works and contemporary contributions to debates. Prerequisite or corequisite: 1100, 1101, 1102, 1103, or 1150. [3] (HCA)

PSCI2264W - Ideas and Presidential Power: From the Founding to the PresentHow ideas have served as claims to presidential power and transformed the presidency as an institution.Separation of powers, executive power, Commander in Chief, mandates, national representation, responsible party government, unitary executive theory, Deep State, descriptive representation, social movements, and American exceptionalism. [3] (SBS)

PSCI2265 - Constitutional Law: Powers and Structures of GovernmentU.S. constitutional system and fundamental principles of constitutional interpretation. Judicial development of principles of distribution and scope of governmental powers. Case method. No credit for students who have earned credit for 261. Repeat credit for students who completed 261a prior to fall 2009. Prerequisite or corequisite: 1100, 1101, 1102, 1103, or 1150. [3] (US)

PSCI2266 - Constitutional Law: Civil Liberties and RightsSupreme Court's interpretation of the Bill of Rights and the Fourteenth Amendment. Case method. No credit for students who have earned credit for 261. Repeat credit for students who earned credit for 261b prior to fall 2009. Prerequisite or corequisite: 1100, 1101, 1102, 1103, or 1150. [3] (US)

PSCI2267 - Participation and Political Representation in AmericaHistory of voting rights and the efficacy of representation in the American political system. Felony disenfranchisement, race and politics, and redistricting. Prerequisite or corequisite: 1100, 1101, 1102, 1103, or 1150. [3] (US)

PSCI2268 - Courts and Social PolicyCourt boundaries vis-a-vis role in public policy formation and institutional management. Intrusion into, or proper functioning of, other government institutions such as Congress, the Presidency, or state governments. Basis of law versus political preferences of the judges. Court's role in supporting or undermining democratic government.[3-4] (US)

PSCI2270 - Conducting Political ResearchResearch sources, designs, and methods used by political scientists. Locating and accessing data, the logic of causal inferences, and basic data presentation and analysis. Prerequisite or corequisite: 1100, 1101, 1102, 1103, or 1150. [3] (SBS)

PSCI2273 - Conflict ManagementConflict management in international and domestic disputes. Negotiation, mediation, adjudication, intervention, and peacekeeping. Prerequisite or corequisite: 1100, 1101, 1102, 1103, or 1150. [3] (SBS)

PSCI2274 - Nature of WarWarfare from ancient to contemporary times. Western and non-Western perspectives. Views from political science, philosophy, history, and official U.S. military doctrine. Interplay among international politics, military strategy, technology, and psychology. Prerequisite or corequisite: 1100, 1101, 1102, 1103, or 1150. [3] (SBS) PSCI2275 - Politics and Strategy of Weapons of Mass Destruction

Warfare from ancient to contemporary times. Western and non-Western perspectives. Views from political science, philosophy, history, and official U.S. military doctrine. Interplay among international politics, military strategy, technology, and psychology. Prerequisite or corequisite: 1100, 1101, 1102, 1103, or 1150. [3] (SBS) PSCI2275 - Politics and Strategy of Weapons of Mass DestructionCauses and effects of the spread of nuclear, biological and chemical weapons, and the history of their use.Responses to the proliferation of WMD, including deterrence, preventive war, and non-proliferation agreements.Nuclear strategy from the Cold War to the present; WMD terrorism. Prerequisite: 1102. [3] (SBS)

PSCI2278 - Music, Politics, & Power in Comparative PerspectivePopular music and politics in comparative context. Music as reflection and catalyst of political change. War and violent conflict, dictatorship, elections, identity, protests, and economic development. Musical composition and lyricism. Impact of music on political events and phenomena, particularly outside the context of the United States. [3] (P)

PSCI2279 - Logic of PoliticsRational choice analysis of politics. Individual and collective choice. Collective action, public goods, and externalities. Prerequisite or corequisite: 100, 101, 102, 103, or 150. [3] (SBS)

PSCI2300 - Introduction to Data Science for PoliticsProblems and techniques using data and statistics to describe and understand political phenomena. [3] (SBS) PSCI2310 - Understanding Policy Data: Analysis and Interpretation

Problems and techniques using data and statistics to describe and understand political phenomena. [3] (SBS) PSCI2310 - Understanding Policy Data: Analysis and InterpretationMethodology of empirical social science research; design and interpretation; inferences and applicability.Identifying a research question to collecting data to establishing and implementing a suitable model for analysis. Not open to students who completed 3894-01 offered spring 2022. [3] (SBS)

PSCI2321 - Solving Political Problems with DataData science and research methods applied to real-world problems. Quantitative analysis in a small-group setting. Data wrangling, data visualization, statistical analysis, R programming, writing and interpretation of analytic reports. Prerequisite: 2300 or DS 1000. [3] (No Axle Credit)

PSCI2400W - Political Economy of CorruptionConcepts and measures of corruption; corruption in different arenas of the public sector; anti-corruption strategies. Case studies from political science, economics, and anthropology. Offered on a graded basis only.Serves as repeat credit for students who have completed 3894 section 02 offered Fall 2020. Prerequisite or corequisite: PSCI 1100, 1101, 1102, 1103, or 1150. [3] (SBS)

PSCI2405W - Political Economy of International DevelopmentLinks between politics, economics, and public policy in international development, through both theoretical and applied perspectives. State building, democracy, rule of law, endowments, colonialism, education, healthcare, social assistance, and gender. Case studies from around the world. Not open to students who have completed 3894 section 02 offered spring 2021. [3] (SBS)

PSCI3206 - Radical Political TheoryMajor frameworks of modern and contemporary political theory. Subjection and domination, communism and capitalism, feminism and politics of work, neoliberalism and biopower, and colonialism and politics of race. [3]

PSCI3211 - The European UnionPolitical and economic integration. Origins, institutions, decision processes, policies, achievements, and prospects of the European integration movement. Prerequisite or corequisite: 1100, 1101, 1102, 1103, or 1150.[3] (INT)

PSCI3217 - Latin American PoliticsCross-national analysis of political institutions, cultures, and processes of change in Latin America. Prerequisite or corequisite: 1100, 1101, 1102, 1103, or 1150. [3] (INT)

PSCI3218 - Public Opinion and Democracy in Latin AmericaPracticum on survey research methods with applications in Latin America. Questionnaire design, analyzing survey data, and interpreting results. Serves as repeat credit for PSCI 3894-05 in Spring 2017. [3] (SBS) PSCI3219 - La pol√≠tica de Am√©rica Latina

Practicum on survey research methods with applications in Latin America. Questionnaire design, analyzing survey data, and interpreting results. Serves as repeat credit for PSCI 3894-05 in Spring 2017. [3] (SBS) PSCI3219 - La pol√≠tica de Am√©rica LatinaOptional discussion taught in Spanish. Open to students concurrently enrolled in PSCI 3217, and who have proficiency in Spanish at or above intermediate-level. Corequisite: 3217. [1] (No AXLE credit)

PSCI3227 - International Politics of East AsiaPolitical relations between governments in East Asia; role of East Asia in the world. Theories applied to contemporary issues. Economic interdependence, security challenges, and China as a global power. Military alliances, nuclear weapons, territorial disputes, and prospects for armed conflict. Prerequisite or corequisite: 1100, 1101, or 1102. [3] (SBS)

PSCI3228 - International Politics of Latin AmericaExamination of Latin America's role in the international and inter-American system. Special attention to the international response to revolutionary change in the area, and to the region's major actors and their changing relationship with the United States, with other major powers, and with other actors such as multinational corporations and international financial institutions. Prerequisite or corequisite: 1100, 1101, 1102, 1103, or 1150. [3] (INT)

PSCI3229 - Strategy and International PoliticsStrategic behavior and strategic choices arising from interactive decision making within the context of international politics. General principles of strategy. In-class experiments and game playing. Prerequisite or corequisite: 1100, 1101, 1102, 1103, or 1150. [3] (SBS)

PSCI3235 - Political IslamRise of political Islam. Origins, goals, and practices of specific Islamic groups throughout the Middle East. Global and local causes of Islamic political mobilization, and the American response to that mobilization. Prerequisite or corequisite: 1100, 1101, 1102, 1103, or 1150. [3] (INT)

PSCI3241 - American Public Opinion and Voting BehaviorThe development and dynamics of political opinion and its effects on voting and public policy. Models of political behavior. Prerequisite or corequisite: 1100, 1101, 1102, 1103, or 1150. [3] (SBS)

PSCI3242 - Police and PrisonsPolitical mechanisms driving crime policy, policing outcomes, and modern mass incarceration. Theories of punishment, racial disparities, public opinion, and reform. Serves as repeat credit for PSCI 3891-01 section 01 in Spring 2017. [3] (SBS)

PSCI3244 - The Legislative ProcessLegislative organization and processes in the U.S. Congress. Attention to parties, elections, institutional structure, interest groups, and other branches of government as they relate to the legislative process.Prerequisite or corequisite: 1100, 1101, 1102, 1103, or 1150. [3] (SBS)

PSCI3246 - American Political DevelopmentPolitical change in the United States. State formation and evolving structure and capacities of American national government. Construction of the political community. How governing institutions have adapted to change. Roots of present-day events and issues in American politics. [3] (SBS)

PSCI3247 - American Political CultureContent, historical development, and political consequences of the American public's deeply rooted values concerning how the political system ought to work and the ends it ought to serve. Attention to regional variation. Prerequisite or corequisite: 1100, 1101, 1102, 1103, or 1150. [3] (US)

PSCI3249 - American Public Opinion and American PoliticsOrigins and effects of public opinion on politics in the United States. Influence of values, emotion, prejudice, and news information on individual political views. Prerequisite or corequisite: 1100, 1101, 1102, 1103, or 1150. [3]

PSCI3250 - Group Conflict and Cooperation in U.S. PoliticsPsychological and institutional sources of division and unity in American politics. Identity formation and change, explicit and implicit racial attitudes, and political tolerance. Prerequisite or corequisite: 1100, 1101, 1102, 1103, or 1150. [3] (SBS)

PSCI3252 - Business and Public PolicyRelationships among business, public policy, and political strategy in the United States and other political systems. Lobbying and legislative politics, antitrust and regulation, intellectual property, international trade, and ethics and corporate social responsibility. Prerequisite or corequisite: 1100, 1101, 1102, 1103, or 1150. [3]

PSCI3253 - Ethics and Public PolicyPolitical and moral values in assessing policy-making, public policies and processes, and policy impacts.Prerequisite or corequisite: 1100, 1101, 1102, 1103, or 1150. [3] (HCA)

PSCI3254 - Political PsychologyInterface between politics and the psychological processes of individuals and groups. Cognition, emotion, identity and intergroup relations, leadership, and extremism. Prerequisite or corequisite: 1100, 1101, 1102, 1103, or 1150. [3] (SBS)

PSCI3258 - Democratic Theory and PracticeTheories of democratic institutions, practices, and values in historical and contemporary political thought.Impact of popular participation on issues of justice, equality, individual freedom, and political power.Prerequisite or corequisite: 1100, 1101, 1102, 1103, or 1150. [3] (HCA)

PSCI3260 - Introduction to American LawLaw as a component of public policy and the political system; the elements and rationale of private law.Prerequisite or corequisite: 1100, 1101, 1102, 1103, or 1150. [3] (SBS)

PSCI3264W - Global FeminismsGlobal politics through feminist perspectives. Interrelated systems of power. Race, gender, sexuality, colonialism, and imperialism. Health, genocide, and slavery. Prerequisite or corequisite: 1100, 1101, 1102, 1103, or 1150. [3] (INT)

PSCI3265 - Human Rights in ActivismRole of human rights in struggles against injustice. Identification of key problems of injustice addressed by a human rights framework. Problems with human rights as a tool for activism. Discussion in contemporary politics.Intellectual and legal traditions that have developed around human rights. No credit for students who have earned credit for PSCI 3896 section 01 offered fall 2016. Offered on a graded basis only. [3] (P)

PSCI3266 - Climate Change JusticeThe challenge of addressing catastrophic climate change. Rationales for integrating or separating global climate and justice goals. Relationship between greenhouse gas emissions and poverty. Global and local public and private policy for climate change and justice. Offered on a graded basis only. [3] (INT)

PSCI3268 - American Health PolicyStructure of the American health care system. Challenges to providing care and improving health. Private and public insurance, inequality, cost growth, quality of care, and reform. Prerequisite or corequisite: 1100, 1101, 1102, 1103, or 1150. [3] (SBS)

PSCI3270 - Human RightsFactors affecting government violation of human rights. Patterns of violations and their explanations. Domestic and international solutions to protect human rights. Prerequisite or corequisite: 1100, 1101, 1102, 1103, or 1150. [3] (SBS)

PSCI3271 - Feminist Theory and ResearchIntroduction to feminist works in the social sciences. Development of feminist analysis. Important issues, feminist theories, and approaches to social criticism. Methodological challenges to feminist research.Prerequisite or corequisite: 1100, 1101, 1102, 1103, or 1150. [3] (P)

PSCI3272 - The War in Iraq (2003-2011)The structure of and changes in the U.S. military during the war. Strategic and tactical dilemmas. Development of Iraqi political institutions. American foreign policy making. Serves as repeat credit for PSCI 3272W. Serves as repeat credit for PSCI 3894, section 01, in Spring 2023. [3] (US)

PSCI3272W - The War in Iraq, 2003-2011The structure of and changes in the U.S. military. Development of Iraqi political institutions. American foreign policy making. Serves as repeat credit for students who completed 287 section 1 in fall 2010 or HUM 161 section 1 in fall 2009. Prerequisite or corequisite: 1100, 1101 1102, 1103, or 1150. [3] (US)

PSCI3273 - Networks and PoliticsHow webs of social relationships affect political behavior; applications to American politics, Comparative politics and international relations. Both online and offline social networks. Concepts, theory, and empirics. Prerequisite: 1101 or 1102. [3] (SBS)

PSCI3273W - Networks and PoliticsHow webs of social relationships affect political behavior; applications to American politics, comparative politics and international relations. Both online and offline social networks. Concepts, theory, and empirics. Serves as repeat credit for 3273. Prerequisite: 1101 or 1102. [3] (SBS)

PSCI3274 - Advanced Readings in Middle East PoliticsRecent books on Middle East. Relevance of works to regional political, social, and economic problems.Prerequisite: 2230. [3] (P)

PSCI3275 - National SecurityHow states ensure their national security. Origins of the security dilemma; the use of power, deterrence, coercion, engagement, and interstate cooperation in settling disputes. Prerequisite or corequisite: 1100, 1101, 1102, 1103, or 1150. [3] (SBS)

PSCI3333 - Law, Politics, and Justice in Times of CrisisContemporary and classical theories of law, politics and justice: rights theories, gender, race and the law; law and democratic politics; political institutions. Prerequisite or corequisite: 1100, 1101, 1102, 1103, or 1150. [3]

PSCI3400 - Political Economy of ElectionsMicroeconomic and game-theory analysis of political institutions and elections. Study of party and candidate positioning; efficiency of political competition; polarization; and information provision and processing.Prerequisite: ECON 3012 or PSCI 2259. [3] (SBS)

PSCI3401 - Political Economy of Institutions and DevelopmentTheoretical mathematical and empirical models; nations' prosperity or poverty. Institutions as factors for disparity in economic development. Familiarity with basic methods of regression analysis is expected. Serves as repeat credit for ECON 3893, section 01 offered Fall 2022. Prerequisite or corequisite: ECON 3012 or PSCI 2259.[3] (SBS)

PSCI3700W - Mass Media and American PoliticsImpact of evolving media environment on U.S. politics. Changes in media; influence on public opinion, elected officials, and policymaking. Not open to students who have completed 3893 section 01 offered fall 2019. [3]

PSCI3841 - Directed StudyParticipation in research projects under the direction of a faculty supervisor. Consent of both the faculty supervisor and the director of undergraduate studies is required. Open only to junior and senior majors. May be repeated for a total of 6 credits in 3841, 3842, 3851, and 3852 combined if there is no duplication in topic, but students may earn only up to 3 credits per semester of enrollment. Prerequisite or corequisite: 1100, 1101, 1102, 1103, or 1150. [1-3] (No AXLE credit)

PSCI3842 - Directed StudyParticipation in research projects under the direction of a faculty supervisor. Consent of both the faculty supervisor and the director of undergraduate studies is required. Open only to junior and senior majors. May be repeated for a total of 6 credits in 3841, 3842, 3851, and 3852 combined if there is no duplication in topic, but students may earn only up to 3 credits per semester of enrollment. Prerequisite or corequisite: 1100, 1101, 1102, 1103, or 1150. [1-3; maximum of 6 credits total for all semesters of PSCI 3841, 3842, 3851, and 3852] (No AXLE credit)

PSCI3851 - Independent ResearchDevelopment of a research project by the individual student under direction of a faculty sponsor. Consent of both the faculty sponsor and the director of undergraduate studies is required. Normally open only to majors in political science. May be repeated for a total of 6 credits in 3841, 3842, 3851, and 3852 combined if there is no duplication in topic, but students may earn only up to 3 credits per semester of enrollment. Prerequisite or corequisite: 1100, 1101, 1102, 1103, or 1150. [1-3; maximum of 6 credits total for all semesters of PSCI 3841, 3842, 3851, and 3852] (No AXLE credit)

PSCI3852 - Independent ResearchDevelopment of a research project by the individual student under direction of a faculty sponsor. Consent of both the faculty sponsor and the director of undergraduate studies is required. Normally open only to majors in political science. May be repeated for a total of 6 credits in 3841, 3842, 3851, and 3852 combined if there is no duplication in topic, but students may earn only up to 3 credits per semester of enrollment. Prerequisite or corequisite: 1100, 1101, 1102, 1103, or 1150. [1-3; maximum of 6 credits total for all semesters of PSCI 3841, 3842, 3851, and 3852] (No AXLE credit)

PSCI3880 - Internship TrainingUnder faculty supervision, students from any discipline gain experience with local, state, national, and international government offices or other politically related organizations. A thorough report and research paper are submitted at the end of the semester. Completion of 6 hours of political science, normally a 2.90 grade point average, and prior department approval of the student's plan are required. May be taken on a Pass/Fail basis only and must be taken concurrently with 3882 and/or 3883. These hours may not be included in the minimum hours required in the political science major. Corequisite: 3882 and/or 3883. [1-9] (No AXLE credit) PSCI3881 - Internship Readings and Research

Under faculty supervision, students from any discipline gain experience with local, state, national, and international government offices or other politically related organizations. A thorough report and research paper are submitted at the end of the semester. Completion of 6 hours of political science, normally a 2.90 grade point average, and prior department approval of the student's plan are required. May be taken on a Pass/Fail basis only and must be taken concurrently with 3882 and/or 3883. These hours may not be included in the minimum hours required in the political science major. Corequisite: 3882 and/or 3883. [1-9] (No AXLE credit) PSCI3881 - Internship Readings and ResearchUnder faculty supervision, students from any discipline can gain experience in a variety of settings relevant to Political Science. Hours earned are based upon readings and/or research supervised by a faculty member. A minimum of 1 hour in background readings and research must be completed in PSCI 3881 concurrently with and regardless of the number of hours earned in PSCI 3880. A substantial research paper must be submitted at the end of the semester during which the internship training is completed. These hours may count in the minimum required for the major. Normally, a 3.0 grade point average, 6 hours of prior work in Political Science, and prior approval of a specific plan of work by the director of undergraduate studies are required. Offered on a graded basis only and must be taken concurrently with PSCI 3880. Corequisite: PSCI 3880. [1-6] (No AXLE credit) PSCI3891 - Topics in Contemporary Politics

Under faculty supervision, students from any discipline can gain experience in a variety of settings relevant to Political Science. Hours earned are based upon readings and/or research supervised by a faculty member. A minimum of 1 hour in background readings and research must be completed in PSCI 3881 concurrently with and regardless of the number of hours earned in PSCI 3880. A substantial research paper must be submitted at the end of the semester during which the internship training is completed. These hours may count in the minimum required for the major. Normally, a 3.0 grade point average, 6 hours of prior work in Political Science, and prior approval of a specific plan of work by the director of undergraduate studies are required. Offered on a graded basis only and must be taken concurrently with PSCI 3880. Corequisite: PSCI 3880. [1-6] (No AXLE credit) PSCI3891 - Topics in Contemporary PoliticsPolitical, governmental, and policy issues. May be repeated for credit when topics vary. No more than three hours may be counted toward the major. Prerequisite or corequisite: 1100, 1101, 1102, 1103, or 1150. [1-3] (No AXLE credit)

PSCI3893 - Selected Topics in American GovernmentTopics of special interest. May be repeated for credit more than once if there is no duplication in topic. Students may enroll in more than one section of this course each semester. Prerequisite or corequisite: 1100, 1101, 1102, 1103, or 1150. [3] (No AXLE credit)

PSCI3894 - Selected Topics in Comparative PoliticsTopics of special interest. May be repeated for credit more than once if there is no duplication in topic. Students may enroll in more than one section of this course each semester. Prerequisite or corequisite: 1100, 1101, 1102, 1103, or 1150. [3] (No AXLE credit)

PSCI3895 - Selected Topics in International PoliticsTopics of special interest. May be repeated for credit more than once if there is no duplication in topic. Students may enroll in more than one section of this course each semester. Prerequisite or corequisite: 1100, 1101, 1102, 1103, or 1150. [3] (No AXLE credit)

PSCI3896 - Selected Topics in Political TheoryTopics of special interest. May be repeated for credit more than once if there is no duplication in topic. Students may enroll in more than one section of this course each semester. Prerequisite or corequisite: 1100, 1101, 1102, 1103, or 1150. [3] (No AXLE credit)

PSCI3897 - Selected TopicsTopics of special interest. May be repeated for credit more than once if there is no duplication in topic. Students may enroll in more than one section of this course each semester. No more than a total of 6 credits may be earned for 3897 and 3898 combined. Prerequisite or corequisite: 1100, 1101, 1102, 1103, or 1150. [3] (No AXLE

PSCI4238 - Comparative Political PartiesPolitical parties and their role in the democratic process of modern liberal western democracies, focusing on party systems and party organizations. Prerequisite or corequisite: 1100, 1101, 1102, 1103, or 1150. [3] (SBS) PSCI4257 - The Politics of Capitalism

Political parties and their role in the democratic process of modern liberal western democracies, focusing on party systems and party organizations. Prerequisite or corequisite: 1100, 1101, 1102, 1103, or 1150. [3] (SBS) PSCI4257 - The Politics of CapitalismCommerce and capitalism in social and political life from the eighteenth century to the present. Questions of justice and equality, freedom, and democratic politics. Prerequisite or corequisite: 1100, 1101 1102, 1103, or 1150. [3] (HCA)

PSCI4277 - Future of WarfarePolitical, societal, and technological factors that could affect the future conduct of warfare. Insurgency and counterinsurgency. Military operations other than war. Prerequisite or corequisite: 1100, 1101 1102, 1103, or 1150. [3] (SBS)

PSCI4444 - Unity and American DemocracySpecial topics. Axle category may vary by department and topic. [3]

PSCI4998 - Senior Honors ResearchOpen only to seniors in the departmental honors program. Prerequisite or corequisite: 1100, 1101, 1102, 1103, or 1150. [3] (No AXLE credit)

PSCI4999 - Senior Honors ResearchOpen only to seniors in the departmental honors program. Prerequisite or corequisite: 1100, 1101, 1102, 1103, or 1150. [3] (No AXLE credit)

PORT1001 - Commons iSeminarTopics vary. General Elective credit only. [1] (No AXLE credit)

PORT1103 - Intensive Elementary PortugueseAccelerated introduction to reading, writing, speaking, and listening. Emphasis on practical usage. Intended for students with prior or current study of another Romance language. No credit for students who have earned credit for 1101, 1102, or a higher level Portuguese language course. [3] (INT)

PORT1111 - First-Year Writing SeminarIndependent learning and inquiry in an environment in which students can express knowledge and defend opinions through intensive class discussion, oral presentations, and written expression. May be repeated for credit once if there is no duplication of topic, but students may earn only up to 3 credits in any 1111 course per semester of enrollment. [3; maximum of 6 credits total for all semesters of 1111] (AXLE credit category varies by section)

PORT2203 - Intermediate PortugueseReview of Portuguese grammar with emphasis on conversation, composition, and reading of modern Portuguese literary texts. No credit for students who have earned credit for a higher level Portuguese language course.Prerequisite: 1103. [3] (INT)

PORT2205 - Portuguese and Global HealthSpeaking, reading, and writing; advanced grammar. Health in Brazil and Lusophone Africa, through literary texts, films, articles, and public health publications. Virtual language-learning partnerships with medical students in Lusophone Africa. Prerequisite: 2203. [3] (INT)

PORT2900 - Brazilian Civilization through English Language MaterialThe cultural heritage of Brazil from its earliest days to the present. National identity, race relations, and Brazil's emergence as a major force in the Americas and beyond. Taught in English. Not open to students who have earned credit for PORT 1111 Section 01 without permission. Total credit for this course and PORT 1111 Section 01 will not exceed 3 credit hours. Credit hours reduced from second course taken (or from test or transfer credit) as appropriate. [3] (P)

PORT2995 - Literatures and Cultures of Lusophone AfricaLate-colonial and postcolonial literature, film, and popular culture. Works from Angola, Mozambique, Cabo Verde, Guinea-Bissau, and African migrant communities in Portugal. Imperialism, migration, national identity, and race. Taught in English. Not open to students who earned credit for 3892 section 01 offered fall 2019. [3]

PORT3301 - Portuguese Composition and ConversationExpository writing and development of speaking skills. Emphasis on pronunciation, vocabulary, and grammar.Prerequisite: 2203. [3] (INT)

PORT3302 - Brazilian Pop CultureDevelopment of written and oral communication skills through the study of Brazilian popular culture. Movies, music, television, and magazines. Prerequisite: 2203. [3] (INT)

PORT3303 - Introduction to Luso-Brazilian LiteratureCritical readings and methods of literary analysis. Masterpieces from Portugal and Brazil from all genres in several periods. Conversation and writing. Prerequisite: 3301 or 3302. [3] (HCA)

PORT3850 - Independent StudyA reading course, the content of which varies according to the needs of the individual student. Primarily designed to cover pertinent material not otherwise available to the student in the regular courses of the curriculum. [Variable credit: 1-3 hours, not to exceed 12 over a four-semester period] (No AXLE credit) PORT3891 - Special Topics in Portuguese and Brazilian Literature or Civilization in English

TranslationDoes not count toward a major or minor in Portuguese. May be repeated for credit more than once if there is no duplication in topic. Students may enroll in more than one section of this course each semester. [3] (No AXLE

PORT3892 - Special Topics in Portuguese Language, Literature, or CivilizationMay be repeated for credit more than once if there is no duplication in topic. Students may enroll in more than one section of this course each semester. Prerequisite: 3303. [3] (No AXLE credit)

PORT4350 - Brazilian Culture through Native MaterialDifferences between spoken and written Portuguese in Brazil. Modern culture, including popular music, film, politics, family life, and sports. Prerequisite: 3301 or 3302. [3] (P)

PORT4420 - Brazilian Literature through the Nineteenth CenturyMain literary trends, principal writers and works of Brazilian literature, from colonial beginnings through the nineteenth century. Study of the works of Greg√≥rio de Matos, Gon√ßalves Dias, Alencar, Machado de Assis, and Euclides da Cunha. Prerequisite: 3303. [3] (HCA)

PORT4425 - Modern Brazilian LiteratureBrazilian literature from the Semana de Arte Moderna to the present. Modernist and neo-Modernist movements.Prerequisite: 3303. [3] (HCA)

PSY1001 - Commons iSeminarTopics vary. General Elective credit only. [1] (No AXLE credit)

PSY1111 - First-Year Writing SeminarIndependent learning and inquiry in an environment in which students can express knowledge and defend opinions through intensive class discussion, oral presentations, and written expression. May be repeated for credit once if there is no duplication of topic, but students may earn only up to 3 credits in any 1111 course per semester of enrollment. [3; maximum of 6 credits total for all semesters of 1111] (AXLE credit category varies by section)

PSY1200 - General PsychologyA survey of modern scientific psychology. Topics include development, perception, motivation, learning, thinking, remembering, emotion, intelligence, special aptitudes, and personality development. General applications to human behavior. The student must either analyze published research or be a subject in current research. Not open to students who have earned credit for 1111, sections 1, 2, or 3. Total credit hours for this course and 1111 (sections 1, 2, or 3) will not exceed 3 credit hours. Credit hours reduced from second course taken (or from test or transfer credit) as appropriate. [3] (SBS)

PSY2100 - Quantitative MethodsPrinciples and methods for the statistical analysis of experiments, with emphasis on applications in psychology.Descriptive and inferential statistics. Prerequisite: 1111 section 1, 2, or 3 or 1200; or a major in Child Development, Child Studies, or Cognitive Studies. [3] (MNS)

PSY2150 - Principles of Experimental DesignTheory and research methods in psychological science. Philosophy of science, ethical issues, experimental design, and data interpretation. Prerequisite: 2100 or PSY-PC 2110. [3] (SBS)

PSY3100 - Abnormal PsychologyMental and emotional disorders. Definitions of adequate human functioning processes that disrupt functioning.Methods of evaluation and treatment. Prerequisite: 1111 section 1, 2, or 3 or 1200; or a major in Child Development, Child Studies, or Cognitive Studies. [3] (SBS)

PSY3110 - Social PsychologyThe influence of social conditions upon behavior in interpersonal and group relations. Perception, judgment, learning, and attitudes. Prerequisite: 1111 section 1, 2, or 3 or 1200; or a major in Child Development, Child Studies, or Cognitive Studies. [3] (SBS)

PSY3120 - Cognitive PsychologyAttention, pattern recognition, knowledge representation, language, reasoning, and human intelligence.Prerequisite: 1111 section 1, 2, or 3 or 1200; or a major in Child Development, Child Studies, or Cognitive Studies. [3] (SBS)

PSY3270 - Computational NeuroscienceTheoretical, mathematical, and simulation models of neurons, neural networks, or brain systems. Computational approaches to analyzing and understanding data from behavior, neurophysiology, electrophysiology, or brain imaging. Simulation methods for neural models. Course taught using Python. Recommended: NSC2201.Prerequisite: either DS 1100/CS 1100, 1101, 1103, or 1104 (or a more advanced programming course); and either MATH 1200 or 1300 (or a more advanced calculus course). [3] (MNS)

PSY3560 - Sports PsychologyCurrent views of performance enhancement and team building. Theories of personality, goal setting, and interpersonal dynamics. Careers in sports psychology. Prerequisite: 1200. [3] (No AXLE credit)

PSY3600 - PersonalityMajor theories of personality development, methods of assessment, and results of research, with an emphasis on normal behavior. Prerequisite: 1111 section 1, 2, or 3 or 1200; or a major in Child Development, Child Studies, or Cognitive Studies. [3] (SBS)

PSY3605 - Industrial and Organizational PsychologyScientific theories in cognitive, social, and personality psychology to improve work motivation and performance.Job analysis and assessment methods. Leadership, teamwork, and cross-cultural issues. Prerequisite: 1111section 1, 2, or 3, or 1200; or a major in Cognitive Studies, Child Development, or Child Studies. [3] (SBS) PSY3610 - Introduction to Clinical Psychology

section 1, 2, or 3, or 1200; or a major in Cognitive Studies, Child Development, or Child Studies. [3] (SBS) PSY3610 - Introduction to Clinical PsychologyHistorical foundations, professional ethics, principles of clinical assessment and therapy, and areas of specialization such as health psychology. Prerequisite: 1111 section 1, 2, or 3 or 1200; or a major in Child Development, Child Studies, or Cognitive Studies. [3] (SBS)

PSY3615 - EmotionDefinitions and functions of emotion. Emotion and health, emotion and psychopathology, individual differences, and emotional development. Prerequisite: 1111 section 1, 2, or 3 or 1200; or a major in Child Development, Child Studies, or Cognitive Studies. [3] (SBS)

PSY3620 - SchizophreniaNeurological, psychological, cultural, and evolutionary perspectives. Genetics, epidemiology, symptomatology, sex differences, and affect. Prerequisite: 3100 and NSC 2201. [3] (SBS)

PSY3625 - DepressionPsychological and biological perspectives on unipolar and bipolar affective disorders. Assessment and classification, epidemiology, genetics, family environment, and treatments. Prerequisite: 1111 section 1, 2, or 3or 1200; or a major in Child Development, Child Studies, or Cognitive Studies. [3] (SBS)

PSY3630 - Drugs and BehaviorDrug effects on neural circuits, human physiology, individual psychology, and society. Prior to spring 2023, serves as repeat credit for students who have earned credit for NSC 3260. Serves as repeat credit for NSC 3630.Prerequisite: 1200 or NSC 2201. [3] (SBS)

PSY3635 - Health PsychologyNeurophysiological, endocrine, and immune systems. Factors underlying health habits and lifestyles. Methods to enhance health behaviors and prevent illness. Stress management. Reciprocal interactions among behavior, thoughts, and physiology with resulting effects on physical and psychological health and illness. Prerequisite: 1111 section 1, 2, or 3 or 1200; or a major in Child Development, Child Studies, or Cognitive Studies. [3] (SBS) PSY3640 - Positive Psychology

Neurophysiological, endocrine, and immune systems. Factors underlying health habits and lifestyles. Methods to enhance health behaviors and prevent illness. Stress management. Reciprocal interactions among behavior, thoughts, and physiology with resulting effects on physical and psychological health and illness. Prerequisite: 1111 section 1, 2, or 3 or 1200; or a major in Child Development, Child Studies, or Cognitive Studies. [3] (SBS) PSY3640 - Positive PsychologyOptimal functioning in human psychology. Interdisciplinary approaches to well being, character strengths and virtues, positive emotions, and clinical implications. Not open to students who have earned credit for 1111, section 13. Total credit hours for this course and 1111, section 13, will not exceed 3 hours. Credit hours reduced from second course taken (or from test or transfer credit) as appropriate. Prerequisite: 1111 section 1, 2, or 3 or 1200; or a major in Child Development, Child Studies, or Cognitive Studies. [3] (SBS)

PSY3700 - MovementPsychological, computational, and neural perspectives on the activities of looking, reaching, grasping, speaking, smiling or frowning, walking and running. Prerequisite: 1111 section 1, 2, or 3 or 1200; or a major in Child Development, Child Studies, or Cognitive Studies. [3] (MNS)

PSY3705 - Human SexualityThe physiological, psychological, and cultural bases of sexual behavior. History of sexuality, gender roles, sex in human relationships, diagnosis and treatment of sexual disorders and dysfunctions, cross-cultural perspectives, pornography, rape, AIDS, and homosexuality. [3] (P)

PSY3715 - Animal Behavior and Evolutionary PsychologyComparative and phylogenetic approach to the study of behavior, with special emphasis on sensory processes, instinctive behavior, the genetics of behavior, and ethology. Prerequisite: 1111 section 1, 2, or 3 or 1200; or a major in Child Development, Child Studies, or Cognitive Studies. [3] (SBS)

PSY3730 - Learning and MemoryPrinciples of learning and memory and their neural bases. Classical and operant conditioning; declarative and procedural memories; working memory and cognitive control. Strategies for optimizing learning in college; emotional and social influences; aging and diseases of the brain. Not open to students who have earned credit for 1111, section 8. Total credit hours for this course and 1111, section 8, will not exceed 3 hours. Credit hours reduced from second course taken (or from test or transfer credit) as appropriate. Prerequisite: 1111 section 1, 2, or 3, or 1200; or a major in Child Development, Child Studies, or Cognitive Studies. [3] (SBS).

PSY3750 - PerceptionCurrent theory and research in sensation and perception, including an analysis of philosophical and biological issues. Biological organisms' acquisition, processing, and use of information about objects and events in the environment. Vision, audition, taste, smell, and touch. Prerequisite: Either PSY 1111 section 1, 2, or 3 or 1200; or a major in Child Development, Child Studies, or Cognitive Studies. [3] (MNS)

PSY3755 - Behavioral Decision-makingAffective, cognitive, and motivational processes involved in human judgment and decision-making. Accurate and inaccurate judgments. Optimal and suboptimal decisions. Offered on a graded basis only. Prerequisites: 1111 section 1, 2, or 3 or 1200; or a major in Child Development, Child Studies, or Cognitive Studies. [3] (MNS) PSY3760 - Mind and Brain

Affective, cognitive, and motivational processes involved in human judgment and decision-making. Accurate and inaccurate judgments. Optimal and suboptimal decisions. Offered on a graded basis only. Prerequisites: 1111 section 1, 2, or 3 or 1200; or a major in Child Development, Child Studies, or Cognitive Studies. [3] (MNS) PSY3760 - Mind and BrainConcepts of cognitive neuroscience. Relationship between the brain and perception, cognition, attention, memory, language, thought, emotion, social judgments, and consciousness. Prerequisite: 1111 section 1, 2, or 3or 1200; or a major in Child Development, Child Studies, or Cognitive Studies. [3] (MNS)

PSY3765 - Social Cognition and NeuroscienceNeural underpinnings of social perceptions, evaluations, and decisions. Face perception, attraction and reward processing, social co-operation and competition, decision-making, and moral judgments. Offered on a graded basis only. Prerequisite: 1111 section 1, 2, or 3 or 1200; or a major in Child Development, Child Studies, or Cognitive Studies. [3] (SBS)

PSY3775 - Human MemorySingle- and dual-process models of recognition memory; context and the role of time in memory search; interference versus decay in theories of forgetting. Theories of association, memory for sequences, and memory disorders. [3] (MNS)

PSY3780 - The Visual SystemInterdisciplinary approach to the ways that humans see and interpret their visual environment. Structure of the eye and brain, including optics. Physiology of individual cells and groups of cells. Machine vision and models of visual function, visual attention, and mechanisms of complex visual perception. Prerequisite: 1111 section 1, 2, or 3 or 1200; or a major in Child Development, Child Studies, or Cognitive Studies. [3] (MNS)

PSY3785 - Brain Damage and CognitionEffects of neurological impairment from stroke, injury, or disease on perception, speech, memory, judgment, and behavior. Relationship between brain systems and cognitive systems. Prerequisite: 1111 section 1, 2, or 3 or 1200; or a major in Child Development, Child Studies, or Cognitive Studies. [3] (SBS)

PSY3810 - Spatial CognitionCognitive and neural processes involved in spatial learning, memory, and navigation. Types and nature of spatial knowledge; path integration and wayfinding; gender and cultural differences in navigational skill; effects of technology (e.g., mapping applications); aging and diseases of the brain; comparative perspectives (humans vs. other mammals & insects). Serves as repeat credit for PSY 3810W or PSY 3891-01 in Fall 2017. Prerequisite: 1111 section 1, 2, or 3, or 1200; or a major in Child Development, Child Studies, or Cognitive Studies. [3] (SBS) PSY3810W - Spatial Cognition

Cognitive and neural processes involved in spatial learning, memory, and navigation. Types and nature of spatial knowledge; path integration and wayfinding; gender and cultural differences in navigational skill; effects of technology (e.g., mapping applications); aging and diseases of the brain; comparative perspectives (humans vs. other mammals & insects). Serves as repeat credit for PSY 3810W or PSY 3891-01 in Fall 2017. Prerequisite: 1111 section 1, 2, or 3, or 1200; or a major in Child Development, Child Studies, or Cognitive Studies. [3] (SBS) PSY3810W - Spatial CognitionCognitive and neural processes involved in spatial learning, memory, and navigation. Types and nature of spatial knowledge; path integration and wayfinding; gender and cultural differences in navigational skill; effects of technology (e.g., mapping applications); aging and diseases of the brain; comparative perspectives (humans vs. other mammals & insects). Serves as repeat credit for PSY 3810. Prerequisite: 1111 section 1, 2, or 3, or 1200; or a major in Child Development, Child Studies, or Cognitive Studies. [3] (SBS)

PSY3840 - Directed StudyParticipation in ongoing research projects under direction of a faculty sponsor. Consent of both the faculty sponsor and the director of undergraduate studies is required. Open only to juniors and seniors. May be repeated for credit more than once if there is no duplication in topic, but students may earn only up to 3 credits per semester of enrollment. Prerequisite: 1111 section 1, 2, or 3 or 1200; or a major in Child Development, Child Studies, or Cognitive Studies. [1-3] (No AXLE credit)

PSY3850 - Independent StudyDevelopment of a project by the individual student under direction of a faculty sponsor. Consent of both the faculty sponsor and the director of undergraduate studies is required. Open only to juniors and seniors. May be repeated for credit more than once if there is no duplication in topic, but students may earn only up to 3 credits per semester of enrollment. Prerequisite: 1111 section 1, 2, or 3 or 1200; or a major in Child Development, Child Studies, or Cognitive Studies. [1-3] (No AXLE credit)

PSY3880 - Internship TrainingUnder faculty supervision, students from any discipline can gain experience in a broad range of public and private organizations, institutions and agencies. Work must be related to issues within the spectrum of psychological science, including, but not limited to, neuroscience, clinical psychology, applied psychology, human development, behavior and performance. Credit hours earned are based upon actual work performed at the internship site. A minimum of 3 credit hours in background reading and research must be completed in PSY3881 concurrently with and regardless of the number of hours earned in PSY 3880. A substantial research paper or report must be submitted at the end of the semester during which the internship is completed. These credit hours may NOT count in the minimum required for the Psychology major or minor. Normally, a 3.0 grade point average, 6 hours of prior course work in Psychology, and prior approval of a specific plan of work by the Director of Undergraduate Studies in Psychology are required. Offered on a Pass/Fail basis only and must be taken concurrently with PSY 3881. Corequisite: PSY 3881 Variable credit. [1-9] No AXLE Credit.

PSY3881 - Internship Readings and ResearchUnder faculty supervision, students from any discipline can gain experience in a broad range of public and private organizations, institutions and agencies. Work must be related to issues within the spectrum of psychological science, including, but not limited to, neuroscience, clinical psychology, applied psychology, human development, behavior and performance. Credit hours earned are based upon readings or research supervised by one or more faculty to lend some intellectual foundation to the internship experience. At least one faculty supervisor must be a member of the Psychology Department in the College of Arts and Science at Vanderbilt. A minimum of 3 credit hours in background readings and research must be completed in PSY 3881concurrently with and regardless of the number of hours earned in PSY 3880. A substantial research paper or report must be submitted at the end of the semester during which the internship training is completed. These credit hours may not count in the minimum required for the Psychology major or minor. Normally a 3.0 grade point average, 6 hours of prior course work in Psychology and prior approval of a specific plan of work by the Director of Undergraduate Studies in Psychology are required. Offered on a graded basis only and must be taken concurrently with PSY 3880. Corequisite: PSY 3880. [3-6] (No AXLE credit)

PSY3890 - Special Topics in PerceptionMay be repeated for credit more than once if there is no duplication in topic. Students may enroll in more than one section of this course each semester. Prerequisite: 3750. [3] (No AXLE credit)

PSY3891 - Special Topics in Cognitive PsychologyMay be repeated for credit more than once if there is no duplication in topic. Students may enroll in more than one section of this course each semester. Prerequisite: 3120. [3] (No AXLE credit)

PSY3892 - Special Topics in NeuroscienceMay be repeated for credit more than once if there is no duplication in topic. Students may enroll in more than one section of this course each semester. Prerequisite: NSC 2201. [3] (No AXLE credit)

PSY3893 - Special Topics in Clinical PsychologyMay be repeated for credit more than once if there is no duplication in topic. Students may enroll in more than one section of this course each semester. Prerequisite: 3100. [3] (No AXLE credit)

PSY3894 - Special Topics in Social PsychologyMay be repeated for credit more than once if there is no duplication in topic. Students may enroll in more than one section of this course each semester. Prerequisite: 3110. [3] (No AXLE credit)

PSY3980 - Honors SeminarPSY3981 - Honors SeminarCourse DescriptionIndividual readings, reports, and seminar discussions of the basic areas of psychology. Selection of topics will provide some freedom to pursue individual interests. Open only to departmental honors candidates.Prerequisite: 1111 section 1, 2, or 3 or 1200; or a major in Child Development, Child Studies, or Cognitive Studies. [3] (No AXLE credit)

PSY3981 - Honors SeminarIndividual readings, reports, and seminar discussions of the basic areas of psychology. Selection of topics will provide some freedom to pursue individual interests. Open only to departmental honors candidates.Prerequisite: 1111 section 1, 2, or 3 or 1200; or a major in Child Development, Child Studies, or Cognitive Studies. [3] (No AXLE credit)

PSY3990 - Teaching Psychological ScienceTaken concurrently with an undergraduate course-coordinator or course-assistant appointment. Responsibilities and challenges, teaching techniques, and student engagement. Student-centered learning and teaching.Culminates with each student preparing and delivering one classroom session. Instructor's permission required to register. [3] (SBS)

PSY3995 - Directed Study for Learning AssistantsParticipation as a Learning Assistant for a PSY course under direction of a PSY faculty member. Consent of both the course instructor and the director of undergraduate studies is required. Open only to juniors and seniors.May be repeated for credit. Offered on a graded basis only. Prerequisite: 1200. [1-3] (No AXLE credit) PSY3996 - Pedagogy Seminar

May be repeated for credit. Offered on a graded basis only. Prerequisite: 1200. [1-3] (No AXLE credit) PSY3996 - Pedagogy SeminarTheory and application of pedagogical techniques specific to assistant teaching of courses in Psychology.Learning and memory, teaching ethics, culture and equity in learning environments. Offered on a graded basis only. Prerequisite: 1200. [1] (No AXLE credit)

PSY3998 - Delivery of Psychological ServicesScientific knowledge about human psychopathology and practical applications in a community setting.Community placement and classroom attention to service delivery, skills, ethics, and professional development.Prerequisite: 3100. [3] (SBS)

PSY4218 - Computational Cognitive ModelingComputational modeling of human perception and cognition. Model implementation, parameter estimation, and statistical model evaluation; developing and testing new models; stochastic processes, simulation, and Monte Carlo methods; high-performance computing. Recommended: prior (or concurrent) completion of PSY 3120, 3760, 3775, 3780, or NSC 3270. Prerequisite: one of DS 1100/CS 1100, CS 1101, 1103, or 1104. [3] (MNS) PSY4219 - Scientific Computing for Psychological and Brain Science

Computational modeling of human perception and cognition. Model implementation, parameter estimation, and statistical model evaluation; developing and testing new models; stochastic processes, simulation, and Monte Carlo methods; high-performance computing. Recommended: prior (or concurrent) completion of PSY 3120, 3760, 3775, 3780, or NSC 3270. Prerequisite: one of DS 1100/CS 1100, CS 1101, 1103, or 1104. [3] (MNS) PSY4219 - Scientific Computing for Psychological and Brain ScienceComputer programming, scientific computing methods, and high performance computing applied topsychological and brain sciences problems, such as experimental control, data analysis and visualization, image and signal processing, optimization, and simulation. Some prior coursework in psychology or neuroscience recommended. Prerequisite: DS 1100/CS 1100 or CS 1101 or 1104. [3] (MNS)

PSY4220 - Bayesian Modeling with PythonStatistical and cognitive modeling. Models of memory, psychophysics, categorization, and decision-making.Probabilistic programming in Python. Bayesian parameter estimation and model comparison. Recommended: prior completion of one or more of 3120, 3755, 3760, 3775, or 3780. Prerequisite: one of 4218, CS 1101, 1103, 1104, or NSC 3270. [3] (MNS)

PSY4720 - Experimental Methods in Behavioral NeuroscienceExperimental methods in behavioral neuroscience. Computer-based data acquisition and analysis, statistical reasoning, and manuscript preparation. Prerequisite: 1200 and NSC 2201. [3] (MNS)

PSY4730 - Laboratory in Experimental PsychologyExperimental methods in psychological science. Evaluation of scientific literature, development of testable hypotheses, and computer-based experimentation including programming, data collection, and analysis.Prerequisite: 2150; and 2100 or PSY-PC 2110. [3] (MNS)

PSY4775 - Models of Human MemoryMathematical and computational models of the cognitive processes underlying human memory. Attribute-based models, instance theories, neural network models, retrieved-context models, executive function, and working memory models. Methods of fitting models to empirical data. Prerequisite: 3775, and one of CS 1101, 1103, or 1104. [3] (MNS)

PSY4998 - Honors ThesisParticipation with a staff member in work leading toward the senior thesis. This work may consist of readings and reports or active participation in research and will culminate in an independent research report. Open only to departmental honors candidates. Prerequisite: 3980 or 3981. [3] (No AXLE credit)

PSY4999 - Honors ThesisParticipation with a staff member in work leading toward the senior thesis. This work may consist of readings and reports or active participation in research and will culminate in an independent research report. Open only to departmental honors candidates. Prerequisite: 3980 or 3981. [3] (No AXLE credit)

PSY-PC1001 - Commons iSeminarCommons iSeminar, a 1-hour small seminar experience, open to first-year students. Students and faculty will collaboratively explore a specialized topic in depth in this university-wide seminar sponsored by The Ingram Commons. General Elective credit only. [1]

PSY-PC1115 - First-Year SeminarTopics of interest designed for first year students. Does not count in the writing requirement of the Liberal Education Core. [3]

PSY-PC1117 - First Year Writing SeminarTopics of interest for first year students. Courses are writing intensive and may be applied to the Peabody Liberal Education Core writing requirement. Repeatable with change of topic. [3]

PSY-PC1205 - Minds, Brains, Contexts, and CulturesAn introduction to the cognitive studies major. Readings, lectures, and discussions are focused on thinking and understanding, especially as related to the brain, immediate context, and culture. These topics are considered from a variety of perspectives, including those taken from philosophy; literature; cognitive, social, and developmental psychology; sociology; psychiatry; and cultural anthropology. [3]

PSY-PC1207 - Minds, Brains, Contexts, and CulturesAn introduction to the cognitive studies major. Readings, lectures, and discussions are focused on thinking and understanding, especially as related to the brain, immediate context, and culture. These topics are considered from a variety of perspectives, including those taken from philosophy; literature; cognitive, social, and developmental psychology; sociology, psychiatry; and cultural anthropology. May be applied toward the Peabody Liberal Education Core writing requirement. [3]

PSY-PC1250 - Developmental PsychologyAn overview of human development emphasizing the period from conception through adolescence. Coursecontent includes research methods as well as in-depth coverage of selected topics in cognitive, social, emotional, and physical development. [3]

PSY-PC2110 - Introduction to Statistical AnalysisIntroductory course emphasizes selection, application, and interpretation of measures of relative frequency, location, dispersion, and association. Approaches to statistical inferences are emphasized. Prerequisite: proficiency in high school algebra. [3]

PSY-PC2115 - Advanced Introduction to StatisticsThis calculus-based introductory statistics course emphasizes concepts and techniques in descriptive and inferential statistics. The orientation and data examples are taken from the social/behavioral sciences. Emphasis is placed on statistical theory, analysis, and interpretation of data, from both exploratory and confirmatory perspectives. Prerequisites: Math 1300 and 1301 or equivalent. [3]

PSY-PC2120 - Statistical AnalysisSecond course in statistics for undergraduates. Multifactor analysis of variance designs (including repeated measures), and goodness of fit and contingency analyses. Prerequisite: PSY-PC 2110 or PSY 2100 or ECON 1500or MATH 2810 or a score of 5 on the AP Statistics exam. [3]

PSY-PC2170 - Experimental Research Methods in Child DevelopmentFocuses on how experimental methods are used to understand processes of child development. Throughreadings, class discussion, writing, and research experiences, the class considers excellent examples of classic and contemporary experimental studies of child development. Prerequisite: PSY-PC 1205/1207 or PSY-PC 1250or PSY 1200 and PSY 2100 or PSY-PC 2110 or ECON 1500 or MATH 2810 or a score of 5 on the AP Statistics Exam. [3]

PSY-PC2200 - Psychology of ThinkingAn in-depth exploration of theories and basic research concerning how young adults (i.e., college students) think, reason, and solve problems. Major topics include memory, categorization, reasoning, decision making, problem solving, and expertise. Prerequisite: PSY-PC 1205/1207, or 2250 or PSY 1200. [3]

PSY-PC2230 - Introduction to Educational NeuroscienceEducational neuroscience (ed neuro) is an emerging scientific field that investigates how the brain enables learning. Ed neuro applies the methods of cognitive neuroscience to questions such as what are the brain systems that allow us to read and do math? How do those systems relate to general systems such as attention and memory? This course will provide an introduction to these topics and more, exploring the basics of how the brain is structured, to how we can use neuroimaging methods to understanding the brain structures and processes that support learning. At the end of this course you will have a basic understanding of cognitive neuroscience methods and how they relate to educationally relevant cognitive domains. [3]

PSY-PC2250 - Cognitive Aspects of Human DevelopmentIntroduction to research and theory in cognitive development. Emphasis on infancy and on early and middle childhood. Topics may include development of language, memory, sensation and perception, problem solving, concepts and theories, effects of media, sociocultural support for development, developmental disorders, and logical mathematical reasoning. Prerequisite: PSY-PC 1205/1207 or 1250 or PSY 1200. [3]

PSY-PC2260 - Seminar on Developmental DisabilitiesBefore delving into the many controversies in the disability field, this course first addresses such fundamentals as different models of intellectual and developmental disabilities (IDD’s; e.g., medical and social models, neurodiversity), the history of the field, and the strengths and challenges of people with specific etiologies of IDD(e.g., environmental, autism spectrum disorder, genetic syndromes). The seminar then focuses on a range of pressing concerns for people with IDD (e.g., disparities in healthcare, advances in prenatal genetic testing, needs of families, and inequities in the penal system). In doing so, the seminar intersects with divergent perspectives from medicine, genetics, law, social justice, psychology, education, public opinion and social policies. [3]

PSY-PC2270 - Seminar on Human DiversityThe seminar begins with key concepts related to human diversity: cultural and structural competence, cultural humility, stigma, prejudice, implicit bias, microaggressions, colorblindness, privilege, race, ethnicity, the biology of skin color, intersectionality, and co-synthesis. With these concepts as a backdrop, the course then focuses on different “isms” or “phobias,” e.g., racism, sexism, ableism, ageism, nationalism, antisemitism, homophobia, transphobia, islamophobia. An emphasis is placed on how these “ism” and “phobias” relate to: (1) health and mental health care disparities; (2) incarceration disparities, and (3) student experiences at Vanderbilt. Students also learn tools that facilitate their self-awareness of, and life-long learning about, human diversity. [3]

PSY-PC2300 - Social and Emotional Context of CognitionAn exploration of such social factors as the individual's values, beliefs, and emotions and their contributions to the basic cognitive processes involved in social perception, complex decision making, and problem solving.Topics include the social construction of perceived reality, attitude formation and change, heuristics and biases in social inference, and the role of emotion in coping and problem solving. [3]

PSY-PC2400 - Social and Personality DevelopmentAn overview of basic concepts and current research in social and personality development. Specific topics include research methods, development of self, social cognition, achievement motivation, prosocial behavior, moral development, aggression, gender role development, family and cultural influences. Prerequisite: PSY-PC1205/1207 or 1250 or PSY 1200. [3]

PSY-PC2500 - InfancyThe behavior and physiological development of infants reflect a complex interaction between evolutionary history and genetics, prenatal environmental influences, and early postnatal experience. An overview of each of these topics is provided through classroom discussions and reading assignments focusing on recent empirical studies and major theoretical issues. Prerequisite: PSY-PC 1250. [3]

PSY-PC2550 - Adolescent DevelopmentExamines theory, research, and other literature pertinent to the development and education of adolescents (ages 12-19). Specific topics include: cognitive and social development; issues in identity, intimacy, autonomy, and sexuality; family-adolescent relationships; peer relationships; school achievement and organization; choices and decision making related to work. [3]

PSY-PC2560 - Theories of Developmental Psychology in PracticeWe will study the grand theories of Developmental Psychology in-depth to provide a broad conceptualfoundation for using Developmental Psychology in applied careers. Students will also gain familiarity with current Developmental Psychology concepts relevant to their intended professional practices. Through disciplined collaborative exchanges, students will learn about research advances and theoretical perspectives that are relevant to their fields, but not yet well known by practitioners. The term project assignments are designed to provide students the scholarly skills to not only keep up with current research in Developmental Psychology during their careers, but to seek out new domains of typical development research to learn from so that they can be leaders in their fields. For the final paper, students will write an original scholarly article to engage and inform practitioners. This closely supervised paper will provide students with individual practice using portable scholarly strategies to identify key developmental findings and communicate their importance to other practitioners. [3]

PSY-PC2600 - Educational PsychologyExamines the applications of psychological theories and research to teaching and learning settings. Focuses on cognitive development, problem solving and critical thinking, learning theories, motivation, social contexts, individual differences, classroom issues, and evaluation issues. Prerequisite: PSY-PC 1205/1207 or 1250 or PSY1200. [3]

PSY-PC2700 - Abnormal Child PsychologyThis course will cover etiology, assessment, and treatment of psychological disorders (e.g., depression, anxiety, disruptive behavior disorders, autism spectrum disorders) emerging in childhood and adolescence. We will examine the development and treatment of psychopathology from an integrative perspective, includingbiological, cognitive, behavioral, cultural and environmental perspectives, and explore current issues and challenges in the field Prerequisites: One course from PSY-PC 1205, 1207, 1250, or PSY 1200. [3]

PSY-PC3130 - Introduction to Formal LinguisticsThis course is a general introduction to formal linguistics, the scientific study of human language. We will focus on the major core subfields of linguistics: morphology, phonetics, phonology, syntax, and semantics. This course also touches on questions of sociolinguistics, language variation, and language change. [3]

PSY-PC3140 - Psychology of LanguageThis course covers the basics of the psychology of language, understanding the cognitive processes that underlie language production, language comprehension, and the use of language in society. Throughunderstanding these processes, students will learn ways in which they can improve their own communication skills. [3]

PSY-PC3150 - Language DevelopmentAn overview of language development with an emphasis on relevant research in linguistics, developmental psychology, and comparative psychology. Specific topics covered include research methods, speech perception, conversational competence, word learning, pragmatic development, and syntactic competence. The course is intended for students beyond the first year. [3]

PSY-PC3160 - Bilingualism and Second Language LearningLearn the psychological and brain processes that underlie bilingualism and second language acquisition. Explore state of the art techniques in psychology such as brain imaging and eye-tracking as applied to multi-lingual speakers. Learn about bilingual language processing and learning. Develop the ability to critically evaluate the literature. [3]

PSY-PC3170 - Cognitive Science of ReadingLearn the relation of speech to reading in different writing systems. Understand the nature of visual word recognition. Explore how reading develops and is affected by dyslexia through experiments and formal modals.Investigate the neural substrate of reading development and disability. Examine the causes of reading failure and how science can inform practice. Develop the ability to critically evaluate the literature and use it to apply to education. [3]

PSY-PC3180 - How We TalkThe course will examine how language is used in conversational settings. The course will focus on empirical studies of the psychology of language and will examine the cognitive, social, and contextual processes that guide every-day language use. Prerequisite: PSY-PC 3130 or 3140. [3]

PSY-PC3190 - Language and the BrainLearn brain anatomy underlying language. Understand nonscientific methods used to study language such as neuroimaging and Lesion approaches. Explore brain basis of the lexical processing of nouns, verbs and morphology, and the comprehension of sentences. Investigate the neural substrate and behavioralmanifestation of language disorders such as aphasia. Examine the cortical machinery of reading and writing, and their disorders such as dyslexia and dysgraphia. Develop the ability to critically evaluate the literature. [3]

PSY-PC3200 - Introduction to Clinical PsychologyThis course provides an overview of the science and practice of clinical psychology, with an emphasis on child and adolescent clinical psychology. Clinical research, psychological assessment, psychotherapy, and related issues will be discussed in class. Students examine the techniques used by clinical psychologists to assess and treat psychopathology, and research investigating the efficacy of these techniques. Students will examine the science of clinical psychology by reviewing research from scientific journals on the effects of a specific type of psychotherapy for a specific psychological disorder. Previous courses in abnormal psychology, abnormal child psychology, and psychological research methods/statistics are highly recommended. [3]

PSY-PC3210 - Hospitalized ChildThis course is designed for individuals who want to know more about the psychosocial needs of children, adolescents and families in health care settings and situations. Some of the specific topics covered in this course include: impact of illness and hospitalization on the family; social and developmental issues and how they interface with health care; normative development within the hospital; psychosocial roles of various healthcare team members; preparation of patients and families for health care experiences; utilizing play for therapeutic purposes; spirituality and its impact on the child and family's health care experience; the child who is dying; pediatric palliative and hospice care; an introduction to the field of child life; and an introduction to the field of pediatric / family advanced practice nursing. [3]

PSY-PC3220 - Pediatric Research DesignThis course is designed for individuals interested in conducting pediatric healthcare research with children and their families. The class explores current inquiry paradigms, research processes and procedures, methodology and elements of design, and evidence-based techniques for supporting children and families during healthcare research encounters and improving the quality and efficacy of medical and psychosocial care and research with/for children. [3]

PSY-PC3230 - Play-Based InterventionThis course is designed for individuals interested in using play-based techniques to meet the psychosocial needs of children and families experiencing stress. The concept of "play" is explored from a variety of developmental, psychological, professional, and educational standpoints using seminal texts from leading theorists. Applications of play to promote coping and development for children and families experiencing stress, illness, or discord are considered. Some of the specific topics covered in this course include historical and contemporary play theories, evidence-based uses of play for assessment and intervention, and the implications of play for children's rights and welfare. [3]

PSY-PC3650 - Advanced Topical SeminarAn advanced seminar intended for juniors and seniors in which a particular topic within cognitive studies is considered in depth. Topics vary. May be repeated for credit with change of topic. Prerequisite: PSY 1200 or PSY1250 or PSY-PC 1205 or PSY-PC 1207 or PSY-PC 1250. This course is intended for students beyond the first year unless otherwise specified in the class schedule note. [3]

PSY-PC3722 - Psychometric MethodsCovers the fundamental concepts of psychological measurement and testing, examines a sample of mostimportant psychometric instruments in current use, provides observation of testing, and considers knowledge essential to making wise use of testing information in research and applied child development settings.Prerequisites: PSY-PC 1250 or 1205/1207 or PSY 1200 and PSY-PC 2110 or PSY 2100 or ECON 1500 or MATH2810 or a 5 on the AP Statistics Exam. [3]

PSY-PC3724 - PsychometricsThe basic objectives of this course are for students to learn the fundamental concepts, methods, and principles of educational and psychological measurement. Particular attention will be devoted to reliability and validity issues underlying psychometric theory from original sources, and how psychometric theory relates to the assessment of individual differences or human psychological diversity more generally. Students should choose between PSY-PC 3722 and this course inasmuch as credit for both is not allowed. This course is more demanding in that students will be reading original sources; it is especially relevant to students seeking advanced training in the social sciences or research careers. Prerequisite: PSY-PC 2110 or PSY 2100 and PSY-PC 2120. [3]

PSY-PC3727 - Modern Robust Statistical MethodsCovers modern statistical methods designed to handle violations of statistical assumptions that can compromise classic parametric procedures. More specifically, the student will learn about the classic assumptions of independence, normality, and equal variances that underlie many standard procedures, and become familiar with modern methods that perform vastly better than the classic procedures when assumptions are violated, yet offer few performance penalties under many realistic situations where assumptions are violated. Prerequisite: PSY-PC 2110 or PSY 2100 (or equivalent), and PSY-PC 2120. [3]

PSY-PC3730 - Applied Latent Class and Mixture ModelingOften social science and educational researchers hypothesize that there are unobserved groups or latent classes of persons who show different behavioral patterns, or different patterns of change over time. This course covers mixture models - a statistical approach for assessing the number and size of classes, as well as class homogeneity or heterogeneity. Longitudinal mixture models are also used to allow classes to transition between states at different rates and/or to have different functional forms of change. Prerequisite: PSY-PC 2110 or PSY2100 (or equivalent), and PSY-PC 2120. [3]

PSY-PC3732 - Latent Growth Curve ModelingThe analysis of longitudinal data (repeated measurements on the same people over time) is central for evaluating many theories in social science and educational research. This applied course will focus on one flexible and powerful approach for analyzing within individual change over time, and between individual differences in change: the latent growth curve model. Emphasis will be placed on applications to real data, interpretation of results, and attaining a solid understanding of the statistical model. Prerequisite: PSY-PC 2110or PSY 2100 (or equivalent), and PSY-PC 2120 [3]

PSY-PC3735 - Correlation & RegressionCovers modern correlation and regression techniques, including linear regression, multiple regression, polynomial regression, interaction effects, univariate and multivariate outlier detection, data transformation algorithms, handling of missing data, nonlinear regression, logistic regression, Poisson regression, variable selection procedures, and regression diagnostics and graphics. Prerequisite: PSY-PC 2110 or PSY 2100 (or equivalent), and PSY-PC 2120. [3]

PSY-PC3737 - Structural Equation ModelingThis course introduces the basic principles of path analysis, confirmatory factor analysis, and latent variable structural modeling, which constitutes a powerful set of statistical tools for examining correlational, observational, and even experimental data in the social sciences. Computer techniques for conducting these analyses will also be taught: the LISREL program in particular, but AMOS will also be introduced. [3]

PSY-PC3738 - Introduction to Item Response TheoryStudents are introduced to the basic concepts of educational and psychological measurement, classical test theory (CTT), and item response theory (IRT). These concepts will be taught with practice by illustrating the construction of tests. Prerequisite: PSY-PC 2110 or PSY 2100 and PSY-PC 3722. [3]

PSY-PC3743 - Factor AnalysisThis course covers primarily Exploratory Factor Analysis (EFA), which is extensively used in psychology, education, medicine, and management to investigate the underlying dimensionality of unobserved constructs (e.g., intelligence, psychopathology). The theory behind factor analysis is covered alongside hands-on application to data, exposure to uses of factor analysis in the applied literature, and instruction in popular EFA software. Key topics include model specification, fit and evaluation, rotation methods, questionnaire development, sample size and power issues, and extensions to confirmatory factor models. Prerequisite: PSY-PC2110 or PSY 2100 (or equivalent), and PSY-PC 2120. [3]

PSY-PC3746 - Multivariate StatisticsThis course covers several classical multivariate statistical topics: principal component analysis, rotation, canonical correlations, multidimensional scaling, correspondence analysis, hierarchical clustering. Matrix algebra and basics about multivariate data will be taught at the beginning. The course has both theoretical and applied components. R will be used as the primary computing tool. Prerequisite: PSY-PC 2110 or PSY 2100 (or equivalent), and PSY-PC 2120. [3]

PSY-PC3749 - Applied Nonparametric StatisticsThis course covers nonparametric statistical methods useful when the assumptions of ordinary parametric statistics are not met, and for developing custom statistical techniques useful when other methods do not exist.Coverage is given to distribution-free procedures, sign tests, contingency tables, median tests, chi-square and other goodness-of-fit tests, rank correlations, randomness tests, ordinal regression, Monte Carlo methods, resampling methods (bootstrap and jackknife), tests of independence, 1-sample, 2-sample, and k-sample methods, permutation tests, function smoothing, and splines. Emphasis is placed on underlying theory, application to data, and software. Prerequisite: PSY-PC 2110 or PSY 2100 (or equivalent), and PSY-PC 2120. [3]

PSY-PC3751 - Exploratory Data AnalysisExploratory Data Analysis (EDA) is a modern statistical paradigm developed by John Turkey in the 1970's. EDA emphasizes fitting mathematical models to data as preliminary to the traditional hypothesis testing approach used in confirmatory analyses. Hallmarks of EDA include graphical methods, residual analysis, robust/resistant statistical methods, and data re-expression/transformation. But EDA is actually a whole philosophy of data analysis, and includes treatment of ethics and propriety in research. In this class we study EDA, as it has developed over the past four decades. We also do a great deal of EDA. An "EDA Portfolio" is developed by each student of different data analysis and graphical analysis projects. Included within the course is treatment of "big data" and data mining approaches, and also discussion of the current "replication crisis" and its emphasis on Questionable Research Practices (QRP's); EDA provides a certain type of prescriptive treatment of QRP's.Prerequisites: PSY-PC 2110 or PSY-PC 2120 or PSY-PC 3735 [3]

PSY-PC3850 - Independent StudyDevelopment of an independent study project by the individual student under the direction of a faculty sponsor.Intended primarily for juniors and seniors. Consent of both the faculty sponsor and the director of undergraduate studies is required. May be repeated for credit. [1-3]

PSY-PC3860 - Directed ResearchParticipation in an empirical research project under the direction of a faculty sponsor. Consent of both the faculty sponsor and the director of undergraduate studies is required. May be repeated for credit. [1-3]

PSY-PC3870 - Field Work in Psychology for UndergraduatesOffered to provide field experience appropriate to the student's interests. Open only to students majoring in child development, child studies, or cognitive studies. May be repeated. Consent of instructor required. [1-3]

PSY-PC3890 - Special Topics in PsychologyAdvanced exploration of a psychological orientation to current issues. May be repeated with change of topic. [3]

PSY-PC3980 - Honors SeminarOpen only to Junior level students in the Psychology and Human Development Department honors program. [1-3]

PSY-PC3981 - Honors SeminarOpen only to Junior level students in the Psychology and Human Development Department honors program. [1-3]

PSY-PC4998 - Honors ThesisOpen only to Senior level students in the Psychology and Human Development Department honors program. [3]

PSY-PC4999 - Honor ThesisOpen only to Senior level students in the Psychology and Human Development Department honors program. [3]

PPS1001 - Commons iSeminarTopics vary. General Elective credit only. [1] (No AXLE credit)

PPS2200 - Social Contexts of Public PolicySociological underpinnings and aims. Theoretical and empirical works in sociology, anthropology, political science, and economics. Public policy outcomes and their relation to broader social structures, goals, and values. [3] (SBS)

PPS2250 - History and Ethics of Public PolicyU.S. domestic and international policy-making. Domestic and comparative history; ethics frameworks relevant to public policy. [3] (SBS)

PPS3100 - Cities in the 21st CenturyLocal policy and politics. Education, crime, health, finance, development, and transportation. Urban government and management. No credit for students who have earned credit for 3890-01 offered fall 2015, fall 2016, fall 2017, or fall 2018. [3] (SBS)

PPS3150 - Public FinanceState and local government finance. Revenue sources including taxation, debt, and fees. Financing and budgeting tools. The politics of financial decision making for state and local governments. No credit for students who have earned credit for 3890-01 offered spring 2017 or spring 2018. [3] (SBS)

PPS3160 - Public AdvocacyDevelopment of policy research and discourse skills. Framing issues, telling stories, and choosing and presenting facts in support of a policy position. Navigating policy bureaucracy. Serves as repeat credit for PPS 3890, section 02 in Spring 2019. [3] (SBS)

PPS3200 - Research Methods for Public Policy AnalysisSurveys in public policy analysis. Types, design, modes of implementation, sampling strategies, and data collection. Data management, cleaning, and analysis. [3] (SBS)

PPS3250 - Advanced Quantitative Methods for Public PolicyCausal inference, the empirical toolkit for public policy analysis. Potential outcomes framework, multivariate regression, matching estimators, randomized controlled trials, instrumental variables, difference-in-differences, and regression discontinuity. [3] (SBS)

PPS3850 - Independent Research in Public PolicyNormally only open to majors in Public Policy Studies. May be repeated for a total of 6 credit hours, but students may only earn up to 3 credits per semester of enrollment. [1-3] (No AXLE credit)

PPS3890 - Special TopicsTopics vary. May be repeated for credit more than once if there is no duplication in topic. Students may enroll in more than one section of this course each semester. [3] (No AXLE credit)

PPS4960 - Senior Seminar on Research in Public PolicySupervised research project in policy area incorporating methodologies and analytical insights from more than one discipline. Offered on a graded basis only. [3] (SBS)

PPS4980 - Senior Honors SeminarSenior honors thesis development. [3] (No AXLE credit)

PPS4981 - Senior Honors SeminarSenior honors thesis development. [3] (No AXLE credit)

PPS4999 - Senior Honors ThesisSupervised readings and independent research for honors thesis. Open to seniors in the PPS honors program.[3] (No AXLE credit)

RLST1001 - Commons iSeminarTopics vary. General Elective credit only. [1] (No AXLE credit)

RLST1010 - Encountering Religious DiversityEssential beliefs and practices of the world's major religious traditions. Hinduism, Buddhism, Judaism, Christianity, and Islam. Contemporary scholarship and perspectives on religious encounters from each of these traditions. [3] (HCA)

RLST1100 - Black Religion in AmericaColonial period to the present. Historical and thematic survey of the religious innovations and expressions of African-descended people in the United States. Role of religion in Black enslavement, politics, culture, and identity. Institutional and non-institutional religiosity. Christianity, Islam, conjure, music, and pop culture. [3]

RLST1111 - First-Year Writing SeminarIndependent learning and inquiry in an environment in which students can express knowledge and defend opinions through intensive class discussion, oral presentations, and written expression. May be repeated for credit once if there is no duplication of topic, but students may earn only up to 3 credits in any 1111 course per semester of enrollment. [3; maximum of 6 credits total for all semesters of 1111] (AXLE credit category varies by section)

RLST1190W - Introduction to Southern Religion and CultureAn exploration of the histories of evangelical and non-evangelical expressions in Southern religious culture from the colonial period to the present. The evangelical thrust of Southern culture, with some attention to Catholicism, Judaism, and other religious modes considered outside the mainstream of that culture. [3] (SBS) RLST1200 - Introduction to Judaism

An exploration of the histories of evangelical and non-evangelical expressions in Southern religious culture from the colonial period to the present. The evangelical thrust of Southern culture, with some attention to Catholicism, Judaism, and other religious modes considered outside the mainstream of that culture. [3] (SBS) RLST1200 - Introduction to JudaismComprehensive historical overview of Judaism as a religion and a culture. The main ideas and institutions of Judaism, the centrality of the Hebrew Bible and the meaning of interpretation, thinkers, and movements in Jewish civilization, from rabbinic Judaism, medieval philosophy, mysticism, to modern thought, Zionism, and the foundation of the State of Israel. Recent Jewish self-representation in art. [3] (HCA)

RLST1208 - Themes in the Hebrew BibleA thematic introduction to the Hebrew Scripture/Old Testament. Selected themes-such as creation, revelation, covenant, law, suffering, messianic expectation - are traced through the diverse parts of the Bible (Pentateuch, Prophetic Writings, and Wisdom Literature) as well as in early Jewish texts. The comparison of the various expressions of these themes shows both the distinctiveness of each document and the continuity of the Biblical faith through the centuries. [3] (HCA)

RLST1309 - Themes in the New TestamentA comparative study of New Testament documents following central themes - such as salvation; evil and sin; the roles of Christ, God, and the Spirit; discipleship; the church; sacred history. The distinctive teaching of each New Testament document as related to a concrete historical setting. Comparison with similar themes in Jewish and Hellenistic texts of that period. [3] (HCA)

RLST1330W - The Gnostic GospelsGnostic writings of the 2nd-4th centuries; relationship to other early Christian writings; modern views of Gnosticism. [3] (HCA)

RLST1500 - Introduction to IslamAn historical overview of the different religious traditions in Islam, their basis in the Qur'an and life of the Prophet, their proliferation in the medieval period, and their response to the challenge of modernity. Topics include sunni and shi'i Islam, evolution of law and theology, sufism and political philosophy. Islam in Africa, India, Spain, and southeast Asia as well as the Middle East. [3] (HCA)

RLST1637 - Religions of Tibet and the HimalayaSixth century CE to the present. Religious ideas and practices. Myth, cosmology, doctrine, pilgrimage, and ritual.Adaptation of religious tradition to changing historical and cultural contexts. Encounters among Tibetan Buddhism, B√∂n, Catholicism, and modernity. [3] (INT)

RLST1700 - Religions in ChinaMajor religious traditions of China. Taoism, Buddhism, Confucianism, state-sponsored religious systems, and popular religion. Thought and practice from ancient times to the present. [3] (INT)

RLST1710 - Religions of JapanEarly myths to present-day practices. Buddhism, Shinto, Shugendo, Christianity, and new religious movements.Cosmology, ritual, death, and modernity. Thematic explorations through film. [3] (INT)

RLST1820 - Religion, Sexuality, PowerHistorical, cultural, social scientific, and philosophical theories of how religious and political ideas and institutions are related to and dependent upon assumptions and ideologies of sex, gender, and race. Politics and public discourse on sex and religion. [3] (SBS)

RLST2134 - Asian and Asian-American Religions in the United StatesPractices and transformations of Asian religions in the United States by Asian immigrants and their children.Race, gender, sexuality, politics, nationalism, and media. [3] (HCA)

RLST2210W - Constructions of Jewish Identity in the Modern WorldHow Jewish thinkers at the end of the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries addressed the question of individual and collective identity. Cultural, political, and religious definitions of modern Jewish identity, the role and the reinvention of national myths; the "Jewry of muscles," the "New Hebrews," the Zionist myth narratives in Zionism. [3] (HCA)

RLST2220 - Jewish EthicsA study of the logic and basic values that, in the Jewish tradition, guide thinking about moral problems.Examination of family and social ethical issues found in Talmud and other Jewish classical texts. Basic religious views of modern Jewish thinkers and their relation to contemporary Jewish life. Offered alternately with 1200.[3] (HCA)

RLST2229W - Contested Ground: Sacred Sites Across the Ancient WorldSacred places and structures from the Paleolithic to the medieval period. Comparisons of religious sites worldwide. Cultural heritage and the historical and contemporary politics of ancient religious sites. [3] (P) RLST2234 - Women in Judaism

Sacred places and structures from the Paleolithic to the medieval period. Comparisons of religious sites worldwide. Cultural heritage and the historical and contemporary politics of ancient religious sites. [3] (P) RLST2234 - Women in JudaismJudaism and feminism. Women in the Hebrew Bible, Jewish law, natural philosophy, and history. Case studies in Jewish medieval and modern contexts; problems of assimilation and cultural specificity in modern society. [3]

RLST2250W - History of the BibleJewish and Christian Bibles from the formation of earliest bibles to the present. Major forms of the Bible, major interpretive approaches, and impact on politics and culture. [3] (HCA)

RLST2310 - Interpreting the GospelsThe Synoptic Gospels through history and culture. Focus on either Matthew, Mark, or Luke; a survey of the interpretations of the Gospel from its original historical context, through the history of the church, and more recently in Catholic and Protestant churches after the Holocaust, in African American churches, and in feminist circles. [3] (HCA)

RLST2315 - Introduction to Christian IdeasAncient, modern and contemporary debates in theology. Ideas of God, Jesus, Spirit, salvation, evil, and liberation. Key questions of science, belief, theism, race, gender, and colonial impact of Christian ideas. St. Paul, Augustine, Calvin, Tillich, Gutierrez, Cone, Daly, and Althaus-Reid. [3] (HCA)

RLST2461 - Islam in AfricaSocial and cultural development of Islam across Africa from the eighth century to the present, as illuminated by historical, ethnographic, and literary sources. Interplay between Muslims and outside religious groups, jihads in pre-colonial Africa, and Islam during European colonization. Attention to Sub-Saharan Africa. [3] (INT) RLST2471 - Religion in Africa

Social and cultural development of Islam across Africa from the eighth century to the present, as illuminated by historical, ethnographic, and literary sources. Interplay between Muslims and outside religious groups, jihads in pre-colonial Africa, and Islam during European colonization. Attention to Sub-Saharan Africa. [3] (INT) RLST2471 - Religion in AfricaIndigenous religious forms from pre-colonial Africa to the present. Creation myths, notions about gods and spirits, ritual, magic, witchcraft, art, shamanism, and ancestry. Interplay of indigenous religions with Islam and Christianity. [3] (INT)

RLST2472 - Religion, Ecology, and Power in AfricaThe interrelationship between religion and ecology in Africa; the ways power relations in pre-colonial Africa through the present have determined human-Earth relations. Divine origin and development of the Earth and its peoples; influence on African social structure, ethnically-based occupations, and stewardship over the environment. [3] (INT)

RLST2644 - Buddhist TraditionsHistorical and thematic survey of foundational, Mahayana, and esoteric Buddhist traditions. Mythology, doctrine, meditation, devotional practices, and institutions. Contemporary case studies from Asia and North America. [3]

RLST2664 - Foundations of Hindu TraditionsHindu cosmology and the ritual structure of sacrifice. The effect of the law of cause and effect (karma) on the moral order of the universe (dharma). The emergence of bhakti devotion to key gods and goddesses. The escape from the cycle of lives through yoga, introspection, and devotion. Pilgrimage mapping and the sacred geography of ancient and modern India. Classical mythology of the Vedas, Epics, and Puranas. [3] (INT) RLST2811 - Natural Science and the Religious Life

Hindu cosmology and the ritual structure of sacrifice. The effect of the law of cause and effect (karma) on the moral order of the universe (dharma). The emergence of bhakti devotion to key gods and goddesses. The escape from the cycle of lives through yoga, introspection, and devotion. Pilgrimage mapping and the sacred geography of ancient and modern India. Classical mythology of the Vedas, Epics, and Puranas. [3] (INT) RLST2811 - Natural Science and the Religious LifeHow scientific discoveries and religious teachings are related. Descriptions of the physical universe from Aristotle through Albert Einstein are compared to contemporaneous definitions of the moral life by religious thinkers such as Thomas Aquinas, Martin Luther, Immanuel Kant, and Martin Buber. [3] (P)

RLST2881 - Myth and History in Religious BiographyReligious biography and hagiography as distinct literary genres. Hero mythology and narrative patterning. Ways religions construct unique biographical images by combining the historical life with religious belief. Examples from lives of Jesus, Buddha, Muhammad, Luther, Caitanya, Shinran, and Mama Lola. Interpretive strategies include hermeneutic theory, modes of history, structuralism, and feminism; additional theoretical perspectives on translation, orality, and reader response criticism. [3] (HCA)

RLST2940 - Great Books of Literature and Religion"Great Books" of the Western intellectual tradition, tracing Greco-Roman and Judeo-Christian literature and culture from their origins to synthesis in the medieval period. [3] (HCA)

RLST3007 - Religion Culture and SocietyRelationships between cultural, political, and social dynamics and religion. How religions and spiritual practices shape cultures and are changed by them. Contexts and issues that arise from the religious and spiritual dimensions of human life. [3] (HCA)

RLST3010 - Mindfulness, Religion, and HealingHistories of contemporary mindfulness practices; their origins in both Buddhist and U.S liberal religious traditions. Current uses in medicine, religion, and other spheres of society. Secularization, cultural appropriation, and social consciousness/amnesia. Not open to students who completed RLST 3890-03 offered spring 2022. [3]

RLST3079 - The Sacred and the SecularEthnographies of ritual and religious life. Politics of secularism and religious revival. Issues in anthropology, literature, and philosophy. Christianity, Hinduism, Islam, and Native American Religions. [3] (P)

RLST3119 - Martin Luther King, Jr., and the Social Roles of ReligionKing as religious leader and agent of social change. His views of the social roles of religion seen against the background of late nineteenth-century dissenting traditions and the early twentieth-century social gospel movement in America. Critical evaluations in terms of classical Christian views (e.g., Aquinas, Luther, Calvin, Wesley). [3] (US)

RLST3129 - Race and Religion in AmericaThe religious foundations of racial myths, symbols, images, conflicts, and cultures from the sixteenth century to the present. Gender, violence, sexuality, media, and popular culture. [3]. (US)

RLST3142 - Slave Religion and Culture in the American SouthThe cosmologies, theologies, ethics, rituals, and material realities of enslaved Africans and African-Americans beginning in pre-colonial Africa and ending in the Civil War. Music, Movement, Myth, Magic, and Sexuality. [3]

RLST3178 - Native American Religious TraditionsDiversity of First Nation religious traditions in North America, especially Eastern Woodlands and Plains. Spiritual and cultural dimensions of diversity, cosmologies, stereotypes, cultural resilience, creativity and storytelling, humor, rituals and practices, healing, and sovereignty. [3] (HCA)

RLST3225 - Sexuality in the Hebrew Bible and the Ancient Near EastIssues of sexuality in the Hebrew Bible in the context of the Ancient Near East. Homosexuality, virginity, and incest. [3] (HCA)

RLST3229 - The Holocaust: Its Meanings and ImplicationsInterdisciplinary study of the systematic destruction of European Jewish communities during WWII. Historical, social, political, cultural developments that led to it. Psychological and sociological dimensions of its aftermath.Philosophical and theological problems it raises for both Jews and Christians. [3] (P)

RLST3270 - Jewish Theories of ReligionCritical analysis and discussion of modern Jewish constructions of religion: politically, symbolically, ethically, normatively, and aesthetic-mystically. Selected readings from Cohen, Buber, Rosenzweig, Kaplan, and social philosophers such as Simmel and Habermas on the function, nature, and meaning of religion in secular culture.[3] (P)

RLST3304W - Evangelical Protestantism and the Culture WarsEvangelical traditions from the reformation to their present manifestations in twentieth-century America.Debates concerning the authority of the scripture, the person of Jesus Christ, evangelism, and soul-winning mission, revivalism and social reform, church-state relations, the relationship between science and religion, Biblical vs. "New" morality, and other areas of cultural cleavage. [3] (US)

RLST3306 - Global Interpretations of Christian ScripturesComparative interpretations of Biblical texts by Christians in Africa, Asia, Latin America, and Oceania - with those by Orthodox Christians in Eastern Europe and the Middle East, and by Catholics and Protestants in Western Europe and North America. The role of culture in each type of biblical interpretation. [3] (INT) RLST3312 - The Pauline Interpretation of Christianity

Comparative interpretations of Biblical texts by Christians in Africa, Asia, Latin America, and Oceania - with those by Orthodox Christians in Eastern Europe and the Middle East, and by Catholics and Protestants in Western Europe and North America. The role of culture in each type of biblical interpretation. [3] (INT) RLST3312 - The Pauline Interpretation of ChristianityAn introduction to Pauline Christianity and its place in the early church, using the letters of Paul, the deutero-Pauline letters, and the portrait of Paul in Acts. [3] (HCA)

RLST3313 - Ethics of the New TestamentMajor ethical teachings as presented in New Testament documents, letters, and as interpreted through history and cultures. [3] (HCA)

RLST3316 - Christianity in the Reformation EraThe setting of the Reformation (c. 1500-1648) and its developments together with consideration of some of the significant ecclesiastical, theological, and historical issues of the period. Attention to backgrounds and causes and examination of major individuals and ecclesiastical patterns. The aim of the course is to help students understand and interpret the events, become familiar with some of the major theological documents, and reflect upon questions of continuing historical interest that have come out of the Reformation. [3] (HCA)

RLST3350 - Christian-Jewish Relations in Medieval and Early Modern EuropePolitical and cultural history from the medieval persecutions to the expansion of religious toleration in the Enlightenment. Close consideration of legal toleration, banishments, re-admissions, and the impact of Christian reform movements. [3] (INT)

RLST3380 - History Christian TraditionChristian traditions from the origins to the present. Such themes as Christology, church and state, and the social and cultural contents of changing Christian beliefs, and views of the Church. [3] (HCA)

RLST3472 - Religion and Climate ChangeRole of religion in climate change and as response to planetary catastrophe. Religious and literary texts.Historical, philosophical, and anthropological work. [3] (P)

RLST3561 - Islam in South AsiaHistory of Islam in South Asia. Cultural memory of conquest. Inter-religious interactions. Sufism and Bhakti.Mughal traditions of cosmopolitanism. Legacy of colonialism. Impact of Partition. Shared popular culture and shared sacred spaces. [3] (INT)

RLST3650 - Classical Philosophies of IndiaHindu and Buddhist traditions. The six "mainstream" schools (darsana) of Hindu thought and their interaction with Buddhist philosophy in ancient India. [3] (INT)

RLST3669 - Sacred Space in the Tibetan WorldCreation, mediation, and reproduction of sacred space from artifacts to built structures to geographies.Narrative, ritual, and cosmological aspects of Tibetan Buddhist, B√∂n, and local religious traditions. Cases include premodern to modern periods, and local to global contexts. [3] (INT)

RLST3670W - Buddhism and the StateModels relating Buddhism and the state in ancient and modern Asia. Kingship and spiritual leadership; sacred territory and national identity; legitimation theory and its alternatives; and religious responses to the modern state. Case studies from India, Nepal, Thailand, Burma, Tibet, Mongolia, China, and Japan. [3] (INT) RLST3747 - Daoist Tradition

Models relating Buddhism and the state in ancient and modern Asia. Kingship and spiritual leadership; sacred territory and national identity; legitimation theory and its alternatives; and religious responses to the modern state. Case studies from India, Nepal, Thailand, Burma, Tibet, Mongolia, China, and Japan. [3] (INT) RLST3747 - Daoist TraditionHistorical and thematic survey of the Daoist tradition in China. Philosophical classics and religious scriptures, as well as social history are covered. Daoism today. [3] (HCA)

RLST3749 - Zen BuddhismA study of the development of Zen Buddhism in China and Japan with special attention to its basic philosophy, its position within Mahayana Buddhism, its meditational techniques, and its contemporary significance. [3] (INT) RLST3753 - East Asian Buddhism

A study of the development of Zen Buddhism in China and Japan with special attention to its basic philosophy, its position within Mahayana Buddhism, its meditational techniques, and its contemporary significance. [3] (INT) RLST3753 - East Asian BuddhismEast Asian Buddhist texts. Key Buddhist ideas, values, practices, and institutions. Chronological surveys of key developments in major historical periods. [3] (INT)

RLST3775 - Chinese Religions through StoriesAnalysis of narratives from various religious traditions and genres within early and medieval China. The role of narrative in Chinese religious, cultural, and political life. Primary texts in English translation. Offered on a graded basis only. [3] (INT)

RLST3850 - Independent StudyMay be repeated for a total of 6 credits in 3850 and 3851combined if there is no duplication in topic, but students may earn only up to 3 credits per semester of enrollment. [1-3; maximum of 6 credits total for all semesters of RLST 3850 and 3851] (No AXLE credit)

RLST3851 - Independent StudyMay be repeated for a total of 6 credits in 3850 and 3851 combined if there is no duplication in topic, but students may earn only up to 3 credits per semester of enrollment. [1-3; maximum of 6 credits total for all semesters of RLST 3850 and 3851] (No AXLE credit)

RLST3890 - Special Topics in Religious StudiesMay be repeated for credit more than once if there is no duplication in topic. Students may enroll in more than one section of this course each semester. [3] (No AXLE credit)

RLST3900 - Mysticism and Spirituality, Comparative StudyHindu, Buddhist, Jewish, and Christian texts, practices, and figures historically categorized as "mystics."Genealogies of the term "spirituality" as contemporary rubric for mystical and psycho-affective experiences.Philosophical, historical, and textual perspectives. [3] (P)

RLST3921 - Ethics and EcologyRelationships among humans, nature, and the sacred. Focus on understandings of our 'dominion' over nonhuman nature. The role of religion in shaping attitudes and behaviors regarding the environment. Topics include eco-centered ethics, 'creation care,' reliance on fossil fuels, and alternative sustainable scenarios. [3] (SBS) RLST3926 - Ancient Goddesses

Relationships among humans, nature, and the sacred. Focus on understandings of our 'dominion' over nonhuman nature. The role of religion in shaping attitudes and behaviors regarding the environment. Topics include eco-centered ethics, 'creation care,' reliance on fossil fuels, and alternative sustainable scenarios. [3] (SBS) RLST3926 - Ancient GoddessesAncient concepts of the feminine divine in literature and iconographic evidence. Specific goddesses, their spheres of influence, and their place in the various pantheons. Cultic practices and religious syncretism across cultures, including Mesopotamia, Egypt, and Ancient Israel. Offered on a graded basis only. [3] (INT) RLST3930 - Women and Religion

Ancient concepts of the feminine divine in literature and iconographic evidence. Specific goddesses, their spheres of influence, and their place in the various pantheons. Cultic practices and religious syncretism across cultures, including Mesopotamia, Egypt, and Ancient Israel. Offered on a graded basis only. [3] (INT) RLST3930 - Women and ReligionThemes and issues in the traditions and texts of selected Western religions from a feminist perspective. Biblical and theological images of women, sources of religious authority, psychological and ethical implications of feminist approaches to religion. [3] (P)

RLST3940 - The Nature of EvilHuman evil as expressed in the Shoah, religious fundamentalism, and ethnic cleansing. Theological,philosophical, biological, and literary texts. Evil transformed by scientific inquiry since 1600. [3] (HCA) RLST3941 - Religion, Science, and Evolution

philosophical, biological, and literary texts. Evil transformed by scientific inquiry since 1600. [3] (HCA) RLST3941 - Religion, Science, and EvolutionInteractions between science and religion from antiquity to Charles Darwin. Subsequent modifications of Darwinism and religious responsibilities to evolutionary theories. [3] (SBS)

RLST4100 - Native American PhilosophiesShared concepts and principles among contemporary Native American writers. Time, space, personhood,ecology, and healing. Spirituality and narrative ontology. [3] (HCA)

RLST4371 - Through the Eyes of the Other: A History of Muslim-Christian RelationsTravelogues and interpretive accounts of encountering the religious and cultural 'Other,' Christian or Muslim.Increased awareness of long-standing relationship between two major religious traditions. Offered on a graded basis only. [3] (HCA)

RLST4551 - Islamic MysticismOrigins and development of mystical traditions in Islam; rise of asceticism; early Sufis; development and systematization of Sufi orders and teachings; evolution of theosophical dimensions of mysticism; present day Sufism and its spread in North America; comparison of Islamic mysticism with other forms of mysticism. [3]

RLST4551W - Islamic MysticismOrigins and development of mystical traditions in Islam; rise of asceticism; early Sufis; development and systematization of Sufi orders and teachings; evolution of theosophical dimensions of mysticism; present day Sufism and its spread in North America; comparison of Islamic mysticism with other forms of mysticism. [3]

RLST4552 - Islam in the Modern WorldImpact of colonialism on Muslim societies and everyday life in the cities of the Middle East. Analysis through literary, religious, political, and ethnographic texts. Relationship of Sharia to the modern state; impact of modernity on the understanding and practice of religion. [3] (INT)

RLST4554 - The Qur'an and Its InterpretersThe Qur'an and the Islamic tradition of interpretation. The treatment of Biblical prophets, Jesus and Satan.Interpretations will be drawn from all time periods including rationalist, dogmatic, Shi'i and mystical schools of interpretation. [3] (INT)

RLST4554W - The Qur'an and Its InterpretersThe Qur'an and the Islamic tradition of interpretation. The treatment of Biblical prophets, Jesus and Satan.Interpretations will be drawn from all time periods including rationalist, dogmatic, Shi'i and mystical schools of interpretation. [3] (INT)

RLST4562 - Culture, Religion, and Politics of the Arab WorldDiversity and unity in Arab culture. Religious, sociopolitical, and historical factors shaping Arab identity in the modern age. Encounters and relationships between Arabs and the Western world. The Israeli-Palestinian conflict.[3] (INT)

RLST4593 - Advanced Seminar in Islamic TraditionAnalysis of original Arabic texts, manuscript reading, and research methods. Topics vary. May be repeated for credit more than once if there is no duplication in topic. Students may enroll in more than one section of this course each semester. [3] (HCA)

RLST4665 - Mythologies and Epics of South AsiaClassical Hindu and Buddhist mythologies of South Asia. Sanskrit Mahabharata and Ramayana epics. Regional adaptations of mythical themes in vernacular languages. Buddhist and Islamic narratives of romance and chronicle. Interpretive and performance strategies. Oral, literary, and visual modes of representation. Political deployment of myths. [3] (INT)

RLST4666 - Devotional Traditions of South Asia: Hindu, Muslim, SikhMythology of Hindu pantheon and worship through devotion or bhakti. Techniques for inculcating devotion through meditation, temple rituals, and pilgrimage. Entry of Islam into South Asia. Shi'I and Sufi practices. Sikh traditions. Role of vernacular languages in creating local traditions. Hindu-Muslim interaction, syncretism, and shared sacred space. Challenges to orthodoxy. [3] (INT)

RLST4774 - Japanese MythologyAntiquity to the present. Classic myths and re-tellings over time. Introduction to theoretical frameworks including comparative and historical. Politics, gender, and performance. [3] (INT)

RLST4834 - Post-Freudian Theories and ReligionAn examination of contemporary European and American schools of psychoanalysis. Focus on both the clinical and explanatory theories as they relate to the examination of religious experience. Recommended: 1820. [3]

RLST4835 - Freudian Theories and ReligionA critical assessment of psychoanalytic theories as an explanation of religious behavior. Study of the basic structure of these theories followed by a systematic critique of texts by Sigmund Freud and Erik Erikson.Examination of religious narrative forms. [3] (SBS)

RLST4836 - The Religious Self according to JungThe religious core of human existence as related to the concepts of the archaic unconscious and the birth of the self in C. G. Jung's analytical psychology. Study of the life and thought of Jung as illustrated by his autobiography, Memories, Dreams, Reflections. Critical assessment of his theory as a means for understanding religious phenomena. [3] (SBS)

RLST4837 - Psychology of Religious Myth and RitualExamination of religious rituals and myths from both Christian and other traditions. Critical review of major psychological theories of ritual and myth. Their relevance to an understanding of myth and ritual as religious phenomena. [3] (SBS)

RLST4938 - Marriage in the Ancient Near East and the Hebrew BibleReligious, legal, and socio-economic aspects of marriage. Survey of ancient Sumerian, Assyrian, Babylonian, and Egyptian sources, and relevant sections of the Hebrew Bible. Marriage as an institution at the beginning of recorded history. [3] (INT)

RLST4939 - Religious AutobiographyThe construction of identity in religious autobiography: motivations (personal salvation, witness, proselytism); relationships among self, God, and religious tradition; role of memory; cultural, gender, and religious differences. Readings may include Augustine, Gandhi, Malcolm X, Angelou, Wiesel. [3] (P)

RLST4960W - Approaches to the Academic Study of ReligionTheories and methods for the academic study of religious traditions. Open only to junior and senior majors and minors. [3] (HCA)

RLST4970 - Majors ColloquiumRegular presentations and critical readings of student projects and professional writings. May be repeated for credit twice for a total of 3 credit hours. Open only to majors. [1] (No AXLE credit)

RLST4998 - Senior Honors ThesisReading of primary research sources and writing an honors thesis under the supervision of the thesis adviser.Open only to senior departmental honors students. [3] (No AXLE credit)

RLST4999 - Senior Honors ThesisReading of primary research sources and writing an honors thesis under the supervision of the thesis adviser.Open only to senior departmental honors students. [3] (No AXLE credit)

RPW2333 - Rethinking PandemicsIn this highly interactive class, students will participate in live action role play [LARP] to explore the complex medical and social dimensions of public health crises in the past. We will focus primarily on first-hand accounts of specific diseases (plague, smallpox, and cholera) as experienced from Antiquity to the nineteenth century.

RPW2333W - Rethinking PandemicsIn this course, students will analyze first-hand accounts of pandemics to understand how public health crises were experienced and documented. They will make connections between lived experiences in the past to understand in deeper ways their own experiences during the current pandemic and create personal, first-hand accounts that document their experiences with COVID-19. (HCA) [3]

RPW2610W - A Hands On History of the American Research UniversityVanderbilt as a case study of the American research university after the Civil War. Literary and artistic works.Thematic and chronological attention: Rise of the University; the Gilded Age; Great Depression; World War II and the Cold War; the Civil Rights Movement; and the present day. Primary documents from the University Archives and Special Collections. [3] (US)

RPW3890W - Special Topics[3] (HCA)

RUSS1001 - Commons iSeminarTopics vary. General Elective credit only. [1] (No AXLE credit)

RUSS1101 - First-Year RussianElementary conversation and reading with an emphasis on everyday situations. Introduction to Russian culture and life through contemporary Russian materials. No credit for students who have earned credit for a more advanced Russian language course. [4] (No AXLE credit)

RUSS1102 - First-Year RussianContinuation of 1101 with emphasis on reading and talking about texts. No credit for students who have earned credit for a more advanced Russian language course. Prerequisite: 1101. [4] (INT)

RUSS1105 - Beginning ConversationExpansion of grammar and vocabulary from RUSS 1101 and 1102. Basic fluency in speaking and auralcomprehension. Vocabulary building, extemporaneous speaking, verb conjugation and governance, declension, and other language challenges. Literature, film, and extracts from broadcast media. Prerequisite: 1101.Prerequisite or Corequisite: 1102. [2] (No AXLE credit)

RUSS1111 - First-Year Writing SeminarIndependent learning and inquiry in an environment in which students can express knowledge and defend opinions through intensive class discussion, oral presentations, and written expression. May be repeated for credit once if there is no duplication of topic, but students may earn only up to 3 credits in any 1111 course per semester of enrollment. [3; maximum of 6 credits total for all semesters of 1111] (AXLE credit category varies by section)

RUSS1500 - Introduction to Russian and East European StudiesHistory and culture of Russia and East Europe, 1700-present. Political history, intellectual history, literature, and culture of region. Russia and East Europe in historical and geopolitical context. [3] (P)

RUSS1874 - Russian Fairy TalesPerspectives from history, psychology, politics, gender, and religion. Fairy tale adaptations by Pushkin, Tolstoy, Stravinsky, Nabokov, Bulgakov, and others. Knowledge of Russian is not required. [3] (INT)

RUSS1910W - 19th Century Russian LiteratureLiterature as a battleground for the conflict between traditional values and new, rationalistic values introduced by industrialization and modernization. Gender relations, role of religion, social status of art, and rise of radical political movements. Texts by Tolstoy, Dostoevsky, and Chekhov. Knowledge of Russian not required. No credit for students who earned credit for 2310. [3] (HCA)

RUSS1911W - 20th Century Russian LiteratureMasterpieces of literature as reflections of and reactions to massive social and political changes. Utopian and dystopian writing; literature as investigative reporting; and sincerity vs. postmodern irony. Return to nationalism in Putin's Russia. Including writings by Nabokov and six Nobel laureates: Bunin, Pasternak, Sholokhov, Solzhenitsyn, Brodsky, and Alexievich. Soviet and contemporary genre fiction. Knowledge of Russian is not required. [3] (HCA)

RUSS2201 - Second-Year Russian IReading, speaking, listening, and writing. Grammar review and reading of contemporary Russian texts.Prerequisite: 1102. [4] (INT)

RUSS2202 - Second-Year Russian IIReading, speaking, listening, and writing. Grammar review and reading of contemporary Russian texts.Prerequisite: 2201. [4] (INT)

RUSS2205 - Intermediate ConversationExpansion of grammar and vocabulary from RUSS2201 and 2202. Advanced fluency in speaking and auralcomprehension. Vocabulary building, extemporaneous speaking, verb aspect and governance, declension, and other language challenges. Literature, film, and extracts from broadcast media. Prerequisite: 2201. Prerequisite or Corequisite 2202. [2] (No AXLE credit)

RUSS2210 - Russia Today: Politics, Economics, and CultureFour-week immersion in the history and culture of Russia. Travel to and interaction with residents in Vladimir, Moscow, St. Petersburg, and rural areas. Excursions to UNESCO World Heritage sites and volunteering at community organizations. Pre-departure readings and an examination must be completed. Knowledge ofRussian is not required. [3] (INT)

RUSS2230 - Russia at WarRussia's wars as seen through depictions in literature, film, music, and video games. Works by Tolstoy, Eisenstein, Bulgakov, Babel, Borodin, and others. Knowledge of Russian not required. [3] (INT)

RUSS2273 - Russian Science FictionMasterpieces of the genre including Tarkovsky's Solaris and Stalker, the novels of the Strugatsky Brothers, and Protazanov's Aelita. Various media ranging from literature and film to video games. Knowledge of Russian not required. Serves as repeat credit for students who have earned credit for RUSS 2273W [3] (INT)

RUSS2273W - Russian Science FictionRadical ideas at the intersection of technology, ideology, and the human as physical form and humanity in science fiction. Masterpieces of the genre including Andrei Tarkovsky's films, the novels of the Strugatsky Brothers, and Protazanov's Aelita. Film, fiction, conceptual art, video games, and their historical contexts throughout the twentieth century. Knowledge of Russian not required. Serves as repeat credit for students who have earned credit for 2273. [3] (INT)

RUSS2434 - Russian CinemaMasterpieces of Russian and Soviet cinema from the silent period to the present. Montage theory, propaganda film, politics of the art house, and rise of the Russian blockbuster. Films by master directors Eisenstein, Vertov, Tarkovsky, Sokurov, and Zvyagintsev. Soviet musicals and contemporary popular cinema. Knowledge of Russian not required. [3] (INT)

RUSS2435 - Leo Tolstoy: Anna Karenina and Other MasterpiecesEarly stories and post-conversion novellas. Realist masterpiece Anna Karenina and its film adaptations. Moral inquiry in Tolstoy's writing. Philosophical and psychological exploration into the themes of love, adultery, religion, work, and art. Knowledge of Russian is not required. [3] (INT)

RUSS2436 - Tolstoy's War and PeaceTolstoy's famous novel in cultural, historical, political, and religious context. Selected early and late pieces by Tolstoy; critical commentaries on his place in Russian culture; and film and operatic adaptations of War and Peace. Tolstoy as artistic innovator, political anarchist, and significant moral voice for the 19th century. Serves as repeat credit for RUSS 2435 in Spring 2016. Knowledge of Russian is not required. [3] (INT)

RUSS2438 - Dostoevsky's The Brothers KaramazovHistorical, social, political, philosophical, and religious contexts of one of the great epics of Western and Russian literature. Influence on 20th and 21st century literature and culture. Knowledge of Russian is not required. [3]

RUSS2460 - Modern Yiddish Literature in TranslationLate nineteenth to mid-twentieth century. Diaspora, minority writing, gender, from shtetl to city, and the Holocaust. [3] (INT)

RUSS2463 - The Jewish DiasporaChanging Jewish communities, especially outside the United States and Israel, in macro-historical context. Post-communist European Jewish identity. New global diasporas and their relationship to the largest Jewish communities in Israel and the United States. [3] (INT)

RUSS2485 - Russian Crime FictionDostoevsky, Tolstoy, Nabokov, and others. Contemporary Russian interpretations of Sherlock Holmes and of classic Russian crime cinema. Knowledge of Russian is not required. [3] (INT)

RUSS2537 - Vladimir NabokovMajor works including The Luzhin Defense, Lolita, Pnin, and Pale Fire. Examination of Nabokov's life through his memoir, Speak, Memory, and excerpts from his unfinished final novel, The Original of Laura. Knowledge of Russian is not required. [3] (INT)

RUSS2600 - Women and Resistance in RussiaCultural and political history of women's resistance in Russia, starting in the Putin era working back through the Soviet Union and Imperial Russia to Medieval saints. The concept of resistance and the specificity of female resistance in Russia. Historical narrative in light of missing sources. [3] (INT)

RUSS2639 - From the House of the Dead: Stories of SiberiaDepictions of Siberia from Russian and outside perspectives. Exile, imperial conquests, the Stalinist gulag, and native Siberian cultures. Works on Siberia by Dostoevsky, Tolstoy, Chekhov, Solzhenitsyn, Shostakovich, Kurosawa, and Herzog. Pasternak's Siberia-themed masterpiece Doctor Zhivago and writings by nativeSiberians. Knowledge of Russian not required. [3] (INT)

RUSS2745 - Radical Art: The Avant-Garde RevolutionIntroduction to experimental art-both verbal and visual-in the 1910s-1930s. Movements studied: Cubism, Futurism, Dadaism, Suprematism, Constructivism, and Surrealism through the avant-garde's engagement with various genres and media: the manifesto, performance, sound and image poetry, painting, photomontage, artist's book, magazine, film and architecture. Taught in English. [3] (INT)

RUSS2800 - Viewing Communism in Eastern EuropeExploration of life in Communist Eastern Europe through film, memoir, fiction, photography, and documents. Life in a police-state, variations of socialism, dissent, public memory of the Second World War, revolution, and Communist nostalgia and legacy. Taught in English. [3] (INT)

RUSS2810 - Revolutions and Post-Communisms in Eastern Europe and Eurasia, 1981-2010Life in the Soviet Imperium. Revolutions of 1989 in Eastern Europe. Disintegration of the U.S.S.R., 1989-1991.Challenges of neoliberal transitions to free-market democracies. Post-socialist culture. Ecology and environmentalism; globalization; gender; religion and ideology; mass media; violence; ethno-nationalism; and authoritarianism. Taught in English. [3] (P)

RUSS2820 - Eastern Europe: Critical EncountersEastern Europe from Enlightenment to 1989. Nineteenth century imperial competition, birth of nation-states.Minority rights, World War II and the Holocaust, socialist experimentation, police state, and dissent. Revolutions of 1989. [3] (INT)

RUSS2890 - Russian Religious ImaginationRussian religious thought from its Byzantine roots to collapse of the Holy Empire in the Bolshevik Revolution of 1917. Role of Orthodox Christianity as a defining force in Russian culture. Taught in English. [3] (INT) RUSS2910 - Russia: Old Regime to Revolution

Russian religious thought from its Byzantine roots to collapse of the Holy Empire in the Bolshevik Revolution of 1917. Role of Orthodox Christianity as a defining force in Russian culture. Taught in English. [3] (INT) RUSS2910 - Russia: Old Regime to RevolutionRussian history from the early nineteenth-century old regime through the Russian Revolution of 1917. Culture, society, and serfdom; the Great Reforms, ideology, and radicalism; industrialization; modernity in an agrarian society; twentieth-century revolutions. [3] (INT)

RUSS2915 - Russia: The U.S.S.R. and AfterwardRussian history since the 1917 Revolution. Overview of the old regime; revolution and civil war; the Soviet"Roaring '20s"; Stalinism and the totalitarianized society; World War II. Postwar Soviet society and culture; de-Stalinization and the sixties generation; Gorbachev, perestroika, and disintegration; contemporary history. [3]

RUSS3303 - Advanced Grammar and ReadingAdvanced grammar and reading skills. Prerequisite: 2202. [3] (INT)

RUSS3305 - Advanced Conversation and CompositionAdvanced conversation and composition skills. Prerequisite: 2202. [3] (INT)

RUSS3306 - Advanced Russian Language through Culture and LiteratureLiterature, history, aesthetics, and politics in Russian-speaking cultures. May be repeated for credit if there is no duplication in topic. Prerequisite: 2202. [3] (INT)

RUSS3307 - Advanced Russian Language through Visual Culture and MediaCinema, media arts, visual culture, and media history of Russian-speaking cultures from pre-digital to the digital age. May be repeated for credit if there is no duplication in topic. Prerequisite: 2202. [3] (HCA)

RUSS3308 - Advanced Russian Language through Russian SocietySeminal aspects of Russian literature, culture, and civilization through interdisciplinary lenses. May be repeated for credit if there is no duplication in topic. Prerequisite: 2202. [3] (P)

RUSS3333 - Special OfferingTopics vary. [3]

RUSS3850 - Independent ReadingsDesigned for majors and qualified undergraduates. Projects are carried out under the supervision of a member of the department. All projects must be approved by the department. May be repeated for a total of 6 credits over a four-semester period in 3850 and 3851 combined if there is no duplication in topic, but students may earn only up to 3 credits per semester of enrollment. [1-3; maximum of 6 credits total for four semesters of RUSS

RUSS3851 - Independent ReadingsDesigned for majors and qualified undergraduates. Projects are carried out under the supervision of a member of the department. All projects must be approved by the department. May be repeated for a total of 6 credits over a four-semester period in 3850 and 3851 combined if there is no duplication in topic, but students may earn only up to 3 credits per semester of enrollment. [3; maximum of 6 credits total for four semesters of RUSS 3850

RUSS3880 - Internship TrainingUnder faculty supervision, students gain experience working in a variety of settings, such as civic, corporate, cultural, government, health, media, political, research, and social welfare organizations in the United States and Russia. Background reading and research must be completed in Russian 3881 concurrently with 3880. A minimum of 3 hours of 3881 must be completed, independent of hours taken in 3880. Students may earn up to 6 hours of 3881 credit. A research paper and report must be submitted at the end of the semester during which the internship training is completed. A 2.90 grade point average and prior approval of the director of undergraduate studies of the student's plans are required. Offered on a Pass/Fail basis only and must be taken concurrently with 3881. Hours of 3880 cannot be included in the minimum hours counted toward the Russian majors or minors. Corequisite: 3881. [Variable credit: 1-9] (No AXLE credit)

RUSS3881 - Internship Readings and ResearchUnder faculty supervision, students gain experience working in a variety of settings, such as civic, corporate, cultural, government, health, media, political, research, and social welfare organizations in the United States and Russia. Background reading and research in Russian 3881 must be completed concurrently with 3880. A minimum of 3 hours of 3881 must be completed, independent of hours taken in 3880. Students may earn up to 6 hours of 3881 credit. A research paper and report must be submitted at the end of the semester during which the internship training is completed. A 2.90 grade point average and prior approval of the director of undergraduate studies of the student's plans are required. Corequisite: 3880. [Variable credit: 3-6] (No AXLE

RUSS3890 - Selected TopicsMay be repeated for a total of 12 credit hours in 3890 and 3891 combined if there is no duplication in topic.Students may enroll in more than one section of this course each semester. [1-3; maximum of 12 credit hours total for all semesters of RUSS 3890 and 3891] (No AXLE credit)

RUSS3891 - Selected TopicsMay be repeated for a total of 12 credit hours in 3890 and 3891 combined if there is no duplication in topic.Students may enroll in more than one section of this course each semester. [1-3; maximum of 12 credit hours total for all semesters of RUSS 3890 and 3891] (No AXLE credit)

RUSS4999 - Senior Honors Thesis[3] (No AXLE credit)

SNSK1101 - Elementary Sanskrit IFundamental elements of Sanskrit language in Devanagari script. [3] (No AXLE credit)

SNSK1102 - Elementary Sanskrit IIDevelopment of reading, pronunciation, recitation, and grammatical proficiency. Materials from classical works of religion, philosophy, folklore, drama, and poetry. Discussion of Sanskrit milieu and historical development.Prerequisite: 1101. [3] (HCA)

SNSK2201 - Intermediate Sanskrit IReadings in authentic works of philosophy, religion, poetry, history, and drama. Prerequisite: 1102. [3] (HCA) SNSK2202 - Intermediate Sanskrit II

Readings in authentic works of philosophy, religion, poetry, history, and drama. Prerequisite: 1102. [3] (HCA) SNSK2202 - Intermediate Sanskrit IIReadings in authentic works of philosophy, religion, poetry, history, and drama. Prerequisite: 2201. [3] (HCA) SNSK3301 - Advanced Sanskrit I

Readings in authentic works of philosophy, religion, poetry, history, and drama. Prerequisite: 2201. [3] (HCA) SNSK3301 - Advanced Sanskrit IAdvanced training in Sanskrit language and literature. Drama, poetry, religion, philosophy, and law.Prerequisite: 2202. [3] (HCA)

SNSK3302 - Advanced Sanskrit IIAdvanced training in Sanskrit language and literature. Drama, poetry, religion, philosophy, and law.Prerequisite: 3301. [3] (HCA)

SCED2330 - Pedagogy SeminarThis pedagogy seminar accompanies a core course in the College of Arts & Sciences and examines the process of teaching and learning of that course content. Students enrolled in the core course lecture may elect to participate in this accompanying pedagogy seminar. This optional seminar will be team-taught by the core course instructor and an education faculty member. [2]

SCED3240 - Teaching Science in Elementary SchoolsStudy of the nature of science, discovery (inquiry) teaching and learning, curriculum approaches, goals and standards, trends, instructional and assessment strategies, and resources and materials for teaching science in grades K-5, with emphasis on grades 2-5. [2]

SCED3320 - Introduction to Literacies in ScienceThis course is intended for licensure candidates in secondary science education and for other students who want to explore the concepts and practices of disciplinary literacy, that is, the links between content and communication. [3]

SCED3370 - Teaching Science in Secondary SchoolsStudy of instructional approaches, materials, curriculum resources, trends, inquiry teaching and learning, for teaching in secondary schools. Required for secondary school licensure in the sciences. Prerequisite: EDUC 3310or consent of instructor. Corequisite: SCED 3371. [3]

SCED3371 - Professional Year PracticumObservation, participation, and teaching in middle school and secondary school settings. Corequisite SCED 3370[1-3]

SCED3400 - Modeling in the Secondary Science ClassroomThis course is intended for licensure candidates in secondary science education and for other students who want to explore modeling in the secondary science classroom. [3]

SCED3850 - Independent Study in Science EducationSemi-independent study on selected topics in science education. May be repeated. Consent of supervising instructor required. [1-3]

SCED3890 - Special Topics in Science EducationExploration of a special topic related to science education. May be repeated with change of topic. [1-3]

SCED4963 - Student Teaching Seminar: SecondarySeminar to accompany EDUC 4953. A $300.00 Teacher Performance Assessment fee is associated with this course. [3]

SC3250 - Scientific Computing ToolboxUse of computational tools in multiple science and engineering domains. Simulations of complex physical, biological, social, and engineering systems, optimization and evaluation of simulation models, Monte Carlo methods, scientific visualization, high performance computing, or data mining. Prerequisite: CS 2201 or 2204; MATH 1100 or higher. FALL. [3]

SC3260 - High Performance ComputingParallel computing, grid computing, GPU computing, data communication, high performance security issues, performance tuning on shared-memory-architectures. Prerequisite: CS 2201 or 2204. SPRING. [3]

SC3850 - Independent StudyDevelopment of a research project by the individual student under the direction of a faculty sponsor. Project must combine scientific computing tools and techniques with a substantive scientific or engineering problem.Consent of both the faculty sponsor and one Director of the SC minor is required. Prerequisite: SC 3250. [1-3]

SC3851 - Independent StudyDevelopment of a research project by the individual student under the direction of a faculty sponsor. Project must combine scientific computing tools and techniques with a substantive scientific or engineering problem.Consent of both the faculty sponsor and one Director of the SC minor is required. Prerequisite: SC 3250. [1-3

SC3890 - Special Topics[1-3]

SSED2100 - Scientific and Historical Reasoning in Young ChildrenThis course focuses on issues of the development of subject matter reasoning and understanding in young children. The course will examine the interplay between informal and formal experiences that influence the development of scientific and historical reasoning as children transition from their intuitive theories to a more formal study of subject matter disciplines. [3]

SSED2300 - Pedagogy SeminarThis pedagogy seminar accompanies a core course in the College of Arts & Sciences and examines the process of teaching and learning of that course content. Students enrolled in the core course lecture may elect to participate in this accompanying one credit pedagogy seminar. This optional seminar will be team-taught by the core course instructor and an education faculty member. [1]

SSED3240 - Teaching Social Studies in Elementary SchoolsStudy of conceptual structure of social studies curricula with emphasis on curricular objectives, instructional approaches, teaching materials, and evaluative strategies focusing on teaching social studies in grades K-5, with emphasis on grades 2-5. Corequisite: SCED 3240 and EDUC 3240. [2]

SSED3260 - Human Geography(Also listed as SSED 6240 for Professional Students) An examination of the human and cultural aspects of various regions of the world including the spatial manifestations of culture, population distribution and movements, language, religion, ethnicity, political geography and resource issues. The course examines human geography themes at local, national and international levels and probes the nature of geographical thinking and the characteristics of geography as a social science. [3]

SSED3320 - Introduction to Literacies in the Social StudiesThis course is intended for licensure candidates in secondary education for social studies and for other students who want to explore the concepts and practices of disciplinary literacy that is the links between content and communication. [3]

SSED3370 - Teaching Social Studies in Secondary SchoolsInstructional principles and techniques of teaching social studies. Required of students seeking secondary school licensure in social studies, a social science field, or history. Prerequisite: EDUC 3310 or consent of instructor. Corequisite: SSED 3371. [3]

SSED3371 - Professional Year PracticumObservation, participation, and teaching in middle school and secondary school settings. Corequisite: SSED 3370[1-3]

SSED3850 - Independent Study in Social Studies EducationSemi-independent study on selected topics in social studies education. May be repeated. Consent of supervising instructor required. [1-3]

SSED3890 - Special Topics in Social Studies EducationExploration of special topics related to social studies education. May be repeated with change of topic. [1-3]

SSED4963 - Student Teaching Seminar: SecondarySeminar to accompany EDUC 4953. A $300.00 Teacher Performance Assessment fee is associated with this course. [3]

SOC1001 - Commons iSeminarTopics vary. General Elective credit only. [1] (No AXLE Credit)

SOC1010 - Introduction to SociologyThe study of human society; the nature of culture and its organization. Processes of communication,socialization, mobility, population growth. Repeat credit for students who have completed 1010W. [3] (SBS) SOC1010W - Introduction to Sociology

socialization, mobility, population growth. Repeat credit for students who have completed 1010W. [3] (SBS) SOC1010W - Introduction to SociologyThe study of human society; the nature of culture and its organization. Processes of communication,socialization, mobility, population growth. Repeat credit for students who have completed 1010. No credit for students who have earned credit for 103. [3] (SBS)

SOC1020 - Contemporary Social IssuesSocial change, conflict, and inequality in modern societies. Basic sociological concepts and methods as they apply to social issues and policy. Focus varies by section. Repeat credit for students who have completed 1020W. [3] (SBS)

SOC1020W - Contemporary Social IssuesSocial change, conflict, and inequality in modern societies. Basic sociological concepts and methods as they apply to social issues and policy. Focus varies by section. Repeat credit for students who have completed 1020.[3] (SBS)

SOC1030 - Environment and SocietyInequality, population, social change, technology, and the state. Application of concepts from general sociology and environmental sociology to environmental problems across institutional sectors such as food, water, energy, health, and transportation. [3] (SBS)

SOC1041 - Men and Women in American SocietyThis course focuses on ideas about masculinity and femininity and how these ideas carry with them inequalities in the distribution of power and resources available to men and women. We examine how gender permeates seemingly neutral aspects of everyday life - how we date, sexuality, family life, work relationships, political life, media images. Repeat credit for students who have completed 1041W. [3] (P)

SOC1041W - Men and Women in American SocietyThis course focuses on ideas about masculinity and femininity and how these ideas carry with them inequalities in the distribution of power and resources available to men and women. We examine how gender permeates seemingly neutral aspects of everyday life - how we date, sexuality, family life, work relationships, political life, media images. Repeat credit for students who have completed 1041. [3] (P)

SOC1111 - First-Year Writing SeminarIndependent learning and inquiry in an environment in which students can express knowledge and defend opinions through intensive class discussion, oral presentations, and written expression. May be repeated for credit once if there is no duplication of topic, but students may earn only up to 3 credits in any 1111 course per semester of enrollment. [3; maximum of 6 credits total for all semesters of 1111] (AXLE credit category varies by section)

SOC2100 - Statistics for Social ScientistsDescriptive and inferential statistics with social science research applications. Sampling issues; describing data with measures of central tendencies and dispersion; hypothesis testing using categorical and continuous indicators; multivariate techniques for continuous, categorical, and time dependent data. Limited to majors and minors in Sociology, Public Policy Studies, and Communication of Science and Technology, with preference given to Sociology majors and minors. [3] (SBS)

SOC3001 - Sociological PerspectivesMajor classical and contemporary sociological perspectives such as symbolic interactionism, functionalism, and conflict sociology. Attention to the orientation and style of outstanding representatives of each perspective.Analysis in terms of basic concepts, central questions, substantive themes, methodology, and bearing on contemporary social issues. [3] (P)

SOC3002 - Introduction to Social ResearchOverview and evaluation of research strategies. Interpretation of qualitative and quantitative data. Research methods and design. Evaluate research ethics, research hypotheses, and literature reviews. Prerequisite: 1010, 1010W, 1020, 1020W, or 1030. Open only to sociology, environmental sociology, and public policy majors. [3]

SOC3003 - Research PracticumReview of sociological concepts and methods coupled with experience in data collection and analysis as applied to a research project underway by one or more sociology faculty members. May be repeated for a total of 6credits if there is no duplication of content. [3] (No AXLE credit)

SOC3201 - Cultural Consumption and AudiencesHow audiences and consumers engage with art and culture - from popular music to film, classical art, fashion, and food. [3] (SBS)

SOC3202 - Cultural Production and InstitutionsThe production of culture. The role of artists, firms, and markets in creating cultural objects, ideas, and practices, including novels, television and news, science, music, visual arts, and food. [3] SBS

SOC3203 - Art in Everyday LifeArt and the public sphere. Cultural analysis, critical theory, art production and reception, curation, ethnography.[3] (SBS)

SOC3204 - Tourism, Culture, and PlaceNature of tourist encounters. Marketing and displaying culture to tourists. Implications for urban economies and landscapes, and for tourists and locals. Ethics and dilemmas. Nashville as case study. Field-trip based learning.Frequent travel off-campus will pose scheduling conflicts with other classes immediately prior or after.Prerequisite 1010 or other Sociology class. [3] (SBS)

SOC3205 - Seeing Social LifeHistory, theory, and ethics of visual images in sociological research. Truth status of visual data. How individuals and groups use photographs to make sense of social worlds. Race, ethnicity, gender, social class, and their visual documentation. Methods for collection and analysis of visual data, especially photographs. Prerequisite: SOC 1010, 1010W, 1020, 1020W, 1041, 1041W, or ANTH 1101. [3] (SBS)

SOC3207 - Popular Culture DynamicsExamination of theories and research that link culture and society. Consideration of the mass media arts with particular emphasis on popular music. Focus on creators, industry, and audiences. [3] (SBS)

SOC3213 - Artists, Community, and DemocracyCommunities of diverse artists, minority viewpoints, and cultural pluralism in a democratic society.Contemporary United States with cross-cultural and historical comparisons. [3] (SBS)

SOC3221 - The FamilyStudy of the relationship of family structure to social organization. Comparative and historical approaches to the family. Recent changes in the American family. Courtship, marriage, marital adjustment, parenthood, and family dissolution in relation to contemporary American society. [3] (P)

SOC3222 - Sociology of ReligionTheories of the nature, function, and structure of religion. Religion in America, including fundamentalism, the Black Church, and cults. How religion changes and is changed by secular society. [3] (SBS)

SOC3223 - Schools and Society: The Sociology of EducationHow schools affect individuals and relate to institutions: the government, the economy, social classes, and families. How social attributes, including race and class, affect academic achievement. Controversies such as desegregation and intelligence testing. [3] (SBS)

SOC3224 - Sociology Through BaseballBaseball as a social institution. Group dynamics; baseball as work and business. Free agency and law; race and ethnic relations. Globalization. Serves as repeat credit for students who have earned credit for 3224W. [3] (SBS) SOC3224W - Sociology Through Baseball

Baseball as a social institution. Group dynamics; baseball as work and business. Free agency and law; race and ethnic relations. Globalization. Serves as repeat credit for students who have earned credit for 3224W. [3] (SBS) SOC3224W - Sociology Through BaseballBaseball as a social institution. Group dynamics, baseball as work and business. Free agency and law, race and ethnic relations, and globalization. Serves as repeat credit for students who have earned credit for 3224. [3]

SOC3231 - Contemporary Latin AmericaCurrent history and long-term trends; regional trade. Development strategies and social inequalities. Hispanic Americans, immigration, and the U.S. border; the war on drugs. Race, music, and popular culture. [3] (INT) SOC3232 - Contemporary Mexican Society

Current history and long-term trends; regional trade. Development strategies and social inequalities. Hispanic Americans, immigration, and the U.S. border; the war on drugs. Race, music, and popular culture. [3] (INT) SOC3232 - Contemporary Mexican SocietySociological understanding of contemporary Mexican society. Historical roots of the modern Mexican state.Economic, political, and social institutions operating in Mexico, formal and informal structures, and their consequences. [3] (INT)

SOC3233 - Contemporary American SocietyShifts in the political, economic, and social structure of the United States; changes in technology, demography, and social mores. [3] (US)

SOC3236 - American Jewish LifeDiversity, individualism, and change in Jewish life. Food and culture, memory and identity, gender and assimilation, Reform-Conservative-Orthodox culture wars. [3] (SBS)

SOC3301 - Society and MedicineCultural and social factors in the perception, definition, diagnosis, treatment, and distribution of disease. Doctor-patient relations; role of nurses and other health professions. Social consequences of hospitals, medical technology, medical specialization, and health insurance. [3] (SBS)

SOC3302 - Poverty, Health, and PoliticsPolitics of poverty, health, and social welfare policy in the U.S. from the 1930s to the present. Profiles of poverty and health. Social change, social movements, advocacy, and social enterprise. [3] (SBS)

SOC3303 - Social Dynamics of Mental HealthDefinition and classification of mental health and mental illness. Emphasis on social factors affecting mental health. Different ways of responding to persons in poor mental health and consequences of particular responses. [3] (SBS)

SOC3304 - Race, Gender, and HealthEffect of racial and ethnic background, gender, socioeconomic status, sexual identity, and age or generation on the experiences of health, illness, medical institutions, and work in the health professions. [3] (SBS) SOC3306 - Gender and Medical Work

Effect of racial and ethnic background, gender, socioeconomic status, sexual identity, and age or generation on the experiences of health, illness, medical institutions, and work in the health professions. [3] (SBS) SOC3306 - Gender and Medical WorkGender inequality in the health professions. Relationship between gender inequality and other forms of inequality in health care work. [3] (SBS)

SOC3311 - Climate Change and SocietyThe sociology of climate change, including efforts to reduce greenhouse gases and problems caused by climate change. Comparative analysis of how governments and businesses develop strategies to adapt to climate change. [3] (SBS)

SOC3312 - Environment and DevelopmentRelationship between economic development and the natural environment. Implications of development on our contemporary ways of life and the environmental conditions of our planet. Different models of development for both Western industrial and developing societies, from early imperialism to contemporary globalization. Current global environmental crises, problems of environmental inequality and injustice, and social movements for alternative development initiatives. [3] (SBS)

SOC3313 - Sociology of Health and Environmental ScienceBasic concepts in the sociology of science and their applications to controversies in the health and environmental sciences. Toxins and risk, nutrition, and health. Health and environmental aspects of emerging technologies. Case studies to develop generalizable social-science hypotheses. [3] (SBS)

SOC3314 - Environmental Inequality and JusticeRelationships between social inequalities and environmental degradation, both in the U.S. and internationally.Distribution of environmental hazards across race and class, natural resource rights and management, urban health and sustainability, climate injustices, and environmental justice movements. [3] (SBS)

SOC3315 - Human Ecology and SocietyDemography, social organization, technology, and the global environment. Shifting energy systems; sustainable industries; food production. Growth vs. development. Affluence, waste, and recycling. [3] (INT)

SOC3316 - Business, Civil Society, and the EnvironmentEnvironmental sustainability and social responsibility; interactions among private sector, civil society, state, and consumers. Social movements and industry, politics of green consumption, and rise of third-party certification movements and private governance. Agriculture, fishing, and forestry industries. [3] (SBS)

SOC3317 - Energy Transitions and SocietyComparisons of contemporary societies' transition to low-carbon energy systems. Emphasis on renewable energy and energy efficiency. Perspectives include both wealthy and poor countries. [3] (INT)

SOC3318 - Sociology of Green JobsComparative, historical, and theoretical perspectives of the contemporary transformation of work and employment in green jobs. Emphasis on the U.S. economy. [3] (SBS)

SOC3319 - NGOs, Society, and Climate ChangeNonprofits as complex and diverse actors engaged in climate mitigation, climate adaptation, policy, and energy justice. Logics of nonprofit organizations; grant-writing. Perspectives and insights from sociology, political science, and nonprofit studies. [3] (SBS)

SOC3321 - Population and SocietyThe mutual influence of demographic factors and social structure. Trends in fertility, mortality, population growth, distribution, migration, and composition. Population policy and national development. [3] (INT) SOC3322 - Immigration in America

The mutual influence of demographic factors and social structure. Trends in fertility, mortality, population growth, distribution, migration, and composition. Population policy and national development. [3] (INT) SOC3322 - Immigration in AmericaTheories of international migration, with an emphasis on migration as a social process. Economic and social impact, including assimilation, immigrant incorporation, and the second generation. The migrant experience, including transnational practices, and how immigration redefines race, ethnicity, and gender. Immigration history of the United States. Current U.S. immigration law and policy. Debate on open borders. [3] (SBS) SOC3333 - Special Offering

Theories of international migration, with an emphasis on migration as a social process. Economic and social impact, including assimilation, immigrant incorporation, and the second generation. The migrant experience, including transnational practices, and how immigration redefines race, ethnicity, and gender. Immigration history of the United States. Current U.S. immigration law and policy. Debate on open borders. [3] (SBS) SOC3333 - Special OfferingTopics vary. [3]

SOC3601 - Self, Society, and Social ChangeProblems and prospects for individual participation in social change; volunteering, community service, and philanthropy; role of individuals and voluntary associations in social change. [3] (SBS)

SOC3602 - Change and Social Movements in the SixtiesMid-1950s to mid-1970s. The rise and influence of social movements in the 1960s, including civil-rights, student, anti-Vietnam War, feminist, and countercultural. [3] (SBS)

SOC3603 - Women and Social ActivismHistory of women's participation in social movements. Women's citizenship, environmentalism, second- and third-wave feminism, hate movements, and global feminist activism. Theories of mobilization, collective identity, strategy, and movement outcomes. Not open to students who have earned credit for SOC 1111 Section 17without permission. Total credit for this course and SOC 1111 Section 17 will not exceed 3 credit hours. Credit hours reduced from second course taken (or from test or transfer credit) as appropriate. [3] (SBS)

SOC3604 - American Social MovementsKey social movements in American society. Mobilization, strategy, and effects of movements such as civil rights, LGBT+, feminism, environmental, and labor movements. [3] (US)

SOC3605 - Law and Social MovementsSocial activists and their relationship to the law and legal institutions. Activist litigation, movement legislative influence, protest policing, government surveillance of activists, and rights consciousness. Civil rights, women's, LGBT, environmental, and labor movements. [3] (SBS)

SOC3611 - Women and the LawHistory of laws in the U.S. subordinating women. Efforts by feminists to achieve substantive and procedural equity. Employment, educational, reproductive, and criminal law, and women's role in the legal profession. [3]

SOC3612 - Class, Status, and PowerAnalysis of the competition for jobs, advancement, and income. The influence of social background, education, politics, race, sex, changes in national economy, and other factors will be considered. Theoretical and empirical analysis focusing on the United States. [3] (SBS)

SOC3613 - Law and SocietyLaw, inequality, and racial, ethnic, gender, and economic groups in society. Operation of the legal system, including lawyers, courts, and police. Advantages and disadvantages in law. Law's role in social change. [3]

SOC3614 - Politics, State, and SocietySOC3615 - Human Behavior in OrganizationsCourse DescriptionOrganizations are treated as resources in the production and distribution of goods and services. Case analyses from the economy are reviewed to diagnose "organizational pathologies" and to understand reciprocal impacts among organizational structures, leaders, and citizens. [3] (SBS)

SOC3615 - Human Behavior in OrganizationsOrganizations are treated as resources in the production and distribution of goods and services. Case analyses from the economy are reviewed to diagnose "organizational pathologies" and to understand reciprocal impacts among organizational structures, leaders, and citizens. [3] (SBS)

SOC3616 - Women and Public Policy in AmericaA study of public policies as they affect women in contemporary American society. Issues considered include participation of women in the labor force; effects of employment patterns on the family; birth control, abortion, and health care policies; child care; participation of women in political processes; divorce, child support, and custody; affirmative action policies; present governmental remedies and proposed alternatives. [3] (SBS) SOC3621 - Criminology

A study of public policies as they affect women in contemporary American society. Issues considered include participation of women in the labor force; effects of employment patterns on the family; birth control, abortion, and health care policies; child care; participation of women in political processes; divorce, child support, and custody; affirmative action policies; present governmental remedies and proposed alternatives. [3] (SBS) SOC3621 - CriminologyThe nature, distribution, causes, and control of crime with emphases on contemporary American society and a broad range of types of crime. [3] (SBS)

SOC3622 - Delinquency and Juvenile JusticeThe nature, distribution, causes and control of juvenile delinquency and the operation of the juvenile justice system in contemporary American society. [3] (SBS)

SOC3623 - Deviant Behavior and Social ControlThe social causes of, and societal reactions to, several types of deviant behavior (e.g., juvenile delinquency, crime, sex deviance, mental illness). Examines the probable consequences of suggested solutions to reduce different types of deviant behavior. [3] (SBS)

SOC3624 - Prison LifePrison life from the perspective of prisoners, officials, and the society in which they operate. [3] (SBS) SOC3701 - Racial Domination, Racial Progress

Prison life from the perspective of prisoners, officials, and the society in which they operate. [3] (SBS) SOC3701 - Racial Domination, Racial ProgressRacial and ethnic relations in contemporary American society. Impact of race and ethnicity on education, economics, politics, family, and health. Study of Whites, Blacks, Hispanics, Asians, and Native Americans. Colorblind ideology. [3] (SBS)

SOC3702 - Racial and Ethnic Minorities in the United StatesStatus of blacks, Asians, Hispanics, and other minorities. Migration, identity and association, and strategies to improve group status and reduce intergroup tensions. Comparisons to other countries. [3] (SBS)

SOC3703 - Social Psychology of PrejudicePrejudice and its amelioration. Problems of relations between blacks and whites in the United States. [3] (SBS) SOC3704 - Race, Gender, and Sport

Prejudice and its amelioration. Problems of relations between blacks and whites in the United States. [3] (SBS) SOC3704 - Race, Gender, and SportManifestations of race and gender in sport. Emphasis on race and gender ideologies and the associated inequalities in sport in America. International comparisons for context. [3] (SBS)

SOC3711 - Women, Gender, and GlobalizationGlobalization and its impact on women and gender relations. Multinational corporations, economicdevelopment, and inequality; new forms of work; human rights; feminist movements for change. [3] (INT) SOC3722 - Gender in Society

development, and inequality; new forms of work; human rights; feminist movements for change. [3] (INT) SOC3722 - Gender in SocietyTheoretical approaches to gender relations with a focus on the contemporary U.S. Evolution of gender stereotypes, gender socialization over the life course, gender in social interactions, institutional sources of gender inequality, and intersections of gender with race, social class, and sexual identity. Topics include work, school, families, health, and intimate relationships. [3] (SBS)

SOC3723 - Gender, Sexuality, and the BodyThe body is a physical marker of gender and sexuality. Biological reproduction is saturated with social meanings- shaping ideas about masculinity, femininity, the gender division of labor, and heterosexuality. In this course, we will look at the body as reflexive project and as the site of historical and ideological significance. We address race, ethnicity, physical abilities, and class in explaining variations in cultural ideals. [3] (SBS) SOC3724 - Gender Identities, Interactions, and Relationships

- shaping ideas about masculinity, femininity, the gender division of labor, and heterosexuality. In this course, we will look at the body as reflexive project and as the site of historical and ideological significance. We address race, ethnicity, physical abilities, and class in explaining variations in cultural ideals. [3] (SBS) SOC3724 - Gender Identities, Interactions, and RelationshipsGender identities form and influence interactions in friendships, intimate relations, families, education, and other institutions. Changes and continuities in gender roles within the United States and ways in which race, class, and sexual orientation intersect processes of gender relations. [3] (SBS)

SOC3851 - Independent Research and WritingMay be repeated for a total of 6 credits. Students may enroll in more than one section of this course each semester. [1-6; maximum of 6 credits total for all semesters of 3851] (No AXLE credit)

SOC3880 - Internship TrainingUnder faculty supervision, students gain experience in any of a variety of settings, such as civic, corporate, cultural, government, health, media, political, research, and social welfare organizations. Background reading and research will be completed in Sociology 3881 concurrently with the completion of internship training, Sociology 3880. A minimum of 3 hours of 3881 must be completed with hours taken in 3880. A research paper and report must be submitted at the end of the semester during which the internship training is completed. A 2.90 grade point average, completion of 6 hours of prior work in sociology, and prior departmental approval of the student's plans are required. Offered on a pass/fail basis only and must be taken concurrently with 3881.Hours of 3880 may not be included in the minimum hours counted toward the sociology major. Corequisite: 3881. [1-9] (No AXLE Credit)

SOC3881 - Internship Readings and ResearchUnder faculty supervision, students gain experience in any of a variety of settings, such as civic, corporate, cultural, government, health, media, political, research, and social welfare organizations. Background reading and research will be completed in Sociology 3881 concurrently with the completion of internship training, Sociology 3880. A minimum of 3 hours of 3881 must be completed with hours taken in 3880. A research paper and report must be submitted at the end of the semester during which the internship training is completed. A 2.90 grade point average, completion of 6 hours of prior work in sociology, and prior departmental approval of the student's plans are required. Corequisite: 3880. [3-6] (No AXLE credit)

SOC4961 - Seminars in Selected TopicsMay be repeated for a total of 6 credits if there is no duplication in topic. Students may enroll in more than one section of this course each semester. [3; maximum of 6 credits total for all semesters of 4961] (No AXLE credit) SOC4981 - Honors Research

May be repeated for a total of 6 credits if there is no duplication in topic. Students may enroll in more than one section of this course each semester. [3; maximum of 6 credits total for all semesters of 4961] (No AXLE credit) SOC4981 - Honors ResearchResearch and writing supervised by department staff culminating in the Senior Honors Thesis. Work consists of both background reading and active research. May be repeated for a total of 12 credits if there is no duplication in topic, but students may earn only up to 6 credits per semester of enrollment. Open only to honors candidates. Prerequisite or corequisite: 3002. [3-6; maximum of 12 credits total for all semesters of 4981] (No AXLE credit)

SPAN1001 - Commons iSeminarTopics vary. General Elective credit only. [1] (No AXLE credit)

SPAN1100 - Elementary Spanish I for True BeginnersDesigned exclusively for students with no previous exposure to Spanish. Development of basic listening, speaking, reading, and writing skills with Spanish-speaking culture through a communicative approach.Conducted primarily in Spanish. Not open to students with previous training in Spanish. Three hours of classroom instruction. Students continuing in Spanish take 1102. No credit for students who have already completed 1100 or have earned credit for a more advanced Spanish language course. Students wishing to repeat this course must take 1101 for repeat credit. [3] (No AXLE credit)

SPAN1101 - Elementary Spanish IBasic listening, speaking, reading, and writing skills. Communicative approach and exposure to aspects of Spanish-speaking cultures. Conducted entirely in Spanish. Three hours of classroom instruction. Intended for students with some study of the language at the elementary level. Entrance by departmental placement test.Serves as repeat credit for students who have completed 1100. No credit for students who have earned credit for a more advanced Spanish language course. [3] (No AXLE credit)

SPAN1102 - Elementary Spanish IIFurther development of listening, speaking, reading, and writing skills using a communicative approach.Exposure to aspects of Spanish-speaking culture. Conducted entirely in Spanish. Three hours of classroom instruction. Students continuing in Spanish take 2201. No credit for students who have earned credit for a more advanced Spanish language course. Prerequisite: 1100 or 1101. [3] (INT)

SPAN1103 - Intensive Elementary SpanishA communicative approach to reading, writing, listening, and speaking for students who have studied one to three years of Spanish. Rigorous review of elementary Spanish through three hours of class instruction.Departmental Spanish placement exam score of 275-364. Students continuing in Spanish take 2201. No credit for students who have earned credit for 1100, 1101, or 1102. No credit for students who have earned credit for a more advanced Spanish language course. [3] (INT)

SPAN1111 - First-Year Writing SeminarIndependent learning and inquiry in an environment in which students can express knowledge and defend opinions through intensive class discussion, oral presentations, and written expression. May be repeated for credit once if there is no duplication of topic, but students may earn only up to 3 credits in any 1111 course per semester of enrollment. [3; maximum of 6 credits total for all semesters of 1111] (AXLE credit category varies by section)

SPAN2201 - Intermediate Spanish IDevelopment of intermediate linguistic competence in Spanish using a communicative approach. Study of cultures of Spanish-speaking countries by incorporating authentic materials. Three hours of classroom instruction. Intended for students who have earned credit for 1102 or 1103 or in consultation with the placement test scores on departmental website. No credit for students who have earned credit for a more advanced Spanish language course. [3] (INT)

SPAN2202 - Intermediate Spanish IIDevelopment of intermediate linguistic competence in Spanish using a communicative approach. Study of cultures of Spanish-speaking countries by incorporating authentic materials. Three hours of classroom instruction. Intended for students who have earned credit for SPAN2201. No credit for students who have earned credit for a more advanced Spanish language course. [3] (INT)

SPAN2203 - Intermediate SpanishDevelopment of intermediate linguistic competence in Spanish (listening, speaking, reading, and writing) using a communicative approach. Study of cultures of Spanish-speaking countries by incorporating authentic materials.Four hours of classroom instruction plus one hour of independent research activities. Intended for students who have earned credit for 1102 or 1103 or have a departmental placement score of 365-409. No credit for students who have earned credit for a more advanced Spanish language course. [5] (INT)

SPAN2204 - Intensive Intermediate SpanishDevelopment of intermediate linguistic competence in Spanish using a communicative approach. Study of cultures of Spanish-speaking countries by incorporating authentic materials. Three hours of classroom instruction. Intended for students with the indicated placement test scores on departmental website. Not open to students who have completed 2201 or 2202. No credit for students who have earned credit for a more advanced Spanish language course. [3] (INT)

SPAN2780 - Intensive SpanishA one-month intensive course in the Spanish language, meeting before regular classes begin. Emphasis is placed on conversation, reading, composition, and grammar. Offered only in the Vanderbilt in Spain program.[3] (INT)

SPAN2990 - Images of the Feminine in Spanish CinemaSpanish national cinema from the death of Francisco Franco to the present. Stories written, directed, and told by men about women. Taught in English with subtitled films. [3] (P)

SPAN2995 - Contemporary Latin American Prose Fiction in English TranslationThemes and techniques of the contemporary novel, novella, and short story written by both men and women in Spanish America and Brazil. No credit for graduate students in Spanish or Portuguese. [3] (HCA)

SPAN3290 - Introduction to Spanish for the ProfessionsFifth semester Spanish language course. Recognizing and appreciating cultural diversity within professional environs. Intended for students who have completed 2202 or 2204 or by placement test score. [3] (INT) SPAN3301W - Intermediate Spanish Writing

Fifth semester Spanish language course. Recognizing and appreciating cultural diversity within professional environs. Intended for students who have completed 2202 or 2204 or by placement test score. [3] (INT) SPAN3301W - Intermediate Spanish WritingDevelopment of abilities in composition tasks related to expository writing. Focus on rhetorical techniques for organizing information, vocabulary abilities, and emphasis on collaborative work. Students write several short papers and a final long paper. Intended for students who have earned credit for 2202, or 2203 (prior to Fall 2021), or 2204, or have a departmental Spanish placement exam score of 460 or higher. [3] (INT)

SPAN3302 - Spanish for Oral Communication through Cultural TopicsDevelopment of speaking skills through the study of Spanish and Hispanic culture, and Spanish and Spanish-American current affairs. Texts drawn from contemporary articles, short stories, TV news, documentaries, and Web materials. Different registers of spoken Spanish. The development of effective strategies for oral communication. Offered on a graded basis only. Prerequisite: 3301W. Students with advanced oral skills will be placed in a higher level course. [3] (INT)

SPAN3303 - Introduction to Spanish and Spanish American LiteratureCritical reading and methods of literary analysis. Selections cover all genres in several periods. Prerequisite: 3301W and 3302. [3] (HCA)

SPAN3304 - Contemporary Issues in the Spanish-Speaking WorldCultural phenomena in economics, politics, health care, law, popular music, family, and cuisine. Professional proficiency and cultural literacy through four primary themes: movement, power, health, and intimacy.Prerequisite: 3302. [3] (INT)

SPAN3310W - Spanish for Heritage SpeakersAdvanced-level Spanish writing skills for academic and professional contexts. For heritage speakers of Spanish who have a personal, familial, or community connection to Spanish but received the majority of their formal education in English. [3] (INT)

SPAN3320 - Introduction to Hispanic Cultural StudiesAn examination of contemporary Hispanic culture through a variety of media (newspapers, magazines, comics, Web sites), arts, and entertainment. Prerequisite: 3301W and 3302. Not open to students who have studied abroad. [3] (INT)

SPAN3325 - The Way of Saint JamesOrigins and development of the Way of Saint James, or Camino de Santiago, through an examination ofliterature, art, history, and cultural and religious issues. Contributions from the cult of Saint James and the Way to Spanish national identity. Prerequisite: 3301W and 3302. [3] (HCA)

SPAN3330 - Cultural Studies in the AndesContemporary Andean culture through the lenses of anthropology and archaeology. Popular and elite artistic productions, cultural syncretism, and festive culture. Gender and society. Emphasis on hands-on learning on site. Locations include Lima, Cuzco, and Machu Picchu. Maymester only. Prerequisite: 3301W and 3302. [3] (INT) SPAN3333 - Special Offerings

Contemporary Andean culture through the lenses of anthropology and archaeology. Popular and elite artistic productions, cultural syncretism, and festive culture. Gender and society. Emphasis on hands-on learning on site. Locations include Lima, Cuzco, and Machu Picchu. Maymester only. Prerequisite: 3301W and 3302. [3] (INT) SPAN3333 - Special OfferingsTopics vary. [3]

SPAN3340 - Advanced ConversationAn intercultural approach contrasting Hispanic and American perspectives. Discussions and oral presentations on contemporary issues. For students with a high level of oral proficiency, especially those returning from a semester abroad. Offered on a graded basis only. Prerequisite: 3302. [3] (INT)

SPAN3345 - Spanish in Business and the Global EconomyCultural competency in terminology related to the global economy, management, banking and accounting, human resources, marketing, finance, imports and exports. Economies of the Spanish speaking world and current economic realities through business case study analysis, individual research, and entrepreneurial engagement. Offered on a graded basis only. Prerequisite: 3301W and 3302. [3] (INT)

SPAN3350 - Spanish for the Legal ProfessionAdvanced conversation course emphasizing specialized Spanish legal terminology. The development of linguistic proficiency and cultural competency. Vocabulary acquisition, grammar review, translation practice, oral presentations, and written papers. Prerequisite: 3301W, 3302, and 3303. [3] (INT)

SPAN3355 - Advanced Conversation through Cultural Issues in FilmSpanish and Latin American films as the basis for discussion and analysis of linguistic, historic, cultural, and social issues. Offered on a graded basis only. Prerequisite: 3301W, 3302, and 3303. [3] (INT)

SPAN3360 - Spanish CivilizationThe development of Spanish culture from the Middle Ages to the present in the context of Western civilization.Discussion of historical background, literary and artistic trends, and political and socioeconomic patterns. Not open to students who have attended Vanderbilt in Spain. Prerequisite: 3301W and 3302. [3] (INT)

SPAN3365 - Film and Recent Cultural Trends in SpainThe cinema and Spanish cultural evolution during and after the Franco dictatorship. Prerequisite: 3303. [3] (INT) SPAN3370 - Spanish American Civilization

The cinema and Spanish cultural evolution during and after the Franco dictatorship. Prerequisite: 3303. [3] (INT) SPAN3370 - Spanish American CivilizationThe development of Spanish American culture from colonial times to the present; discussion of basicinstitutions, political and socioeconomic patterns, education, the arts, and folklore. Prerequisite: 3301W and 3302. [3] (INT)

SPAN3375 - Film and Culture in Latin AmericaLatin American cinema in historical perspective. Screenings, critical readings, and supplementary texts.Prerequisite: 3303. [3] (P)

SPAN3380 - The Spanish LanguageAn advanced grammar course with emphasis on problem constructions, stylistics, and composition. Offered only in the Vanderbilt in Spain program. [3] (INT)

SPAN3385 - Creative Writing and Advanced GrammarDevelopment of writing skills through advanced grammatical concepts, vocabulary, and writing techniques and the production of short stories, essays, poems, and other forms of textual discourse. Prerequisite: 3303. [3]

SPAN3830 - Spanish, Health and SocietyAdvanced linguistic and cultural tools for the study of human anatomy, and chronic and common diseases (prevention, detection, symptoms and diagnostic tests, treatment and follow-up). Comprehensive analysis of the current state of health of the Latino population. Physical and mental well-being, public policy, and health care in the United States. Service-learning component in the Latinx community, Prerequisite: 3301W and 3302. [3]

SPAN3835 - Latino Immigration ExperienceLiterature and film that depict the immigration and assimilation experiences of the main Latino groups. Service to the Latino community integral part of course work. Prerequisite: 3303. [3] (P)

SPAN3850 - Independent StudyDesigned primarily for majors. Projects are arranged with individual professors and must be approved by the director of undergraduate studies before the close of registration in the semester of the project. May be repeated for a total of 12 credits over a four semester period, but students may earn only up to 3 credits per semester of enrollment. [1-3; maximum of 12 credits total for fours semesters of SPAN 3850] (No AXLE credit) SPAN3880 - Internship Training in Spain

Designed primarily for majors. Projects are arranged with individual professors and must be approved by the director of undergraduate studies before the close of registration in the semester of the project. May be repeated for a total of 12 credits over a four semester period, but students may earn only up to 3 credits per semester of enrollment. [1-3; maximum of 12 credits total for fours semesters of SPAN 3850] (No AXLE credit) SPAN3880 - Internship Training in SpainUnder faculty supervision, students gain experience in public or private organizations and complete research and readings. Offered on a pass/fail basis only and must be taken concurrently with 3881. Corequisite: 3881. [1]

SPAN3881 - Internship Readings and Research in SpainUnder faculty supervision, students gain experience in public or private organizations, and complete research and readings. Must be taken concurrently with 3880. Corequisite: 3880. [3] (No AXLE credit)

SPAN3891 - Special Topics in Hispanic CulturePrerequisite: 3303. May be repeated for credit more than once if there is no duplication in topic. Students may enroll in more than one section of this course each semester. [3] (No AXLE credit)

SPAN3892 - Special Topics in Spanish Language and LinguisticsPrerequisite: 3303. May be repeated for credit more than once if there is no duplication in topic. Students may enroll in more than one section of this course each semester. [3] (No AXLE credit)

SPAN3893 - Special Topics in Hispanic LiteraturePrerequisite: 3303. May be repeated for credit more than once if there is no duplication in topic. Students may enroll in more than one section of this course each semester. [3] (No AXLE credit)

SPAN4300 - Introduction to Spanish LinguisticsMajor linguistic subsystems of the Spanish language. Morphology, syntax, phonetics and phonology. Semantics and pragmatics, dialectology, and sociolinguistics. No previous knowledge of linguistics required. Prerequisite: 3301W and 3302. [3] (SBS)

SPAN4310 - Translation and InterpretationTheory and practice of translation and interpretation, both from English to Spanish and Spanish to English.Practical knowledge of the basic modes of translation (direct and oblique) and interpretation (sight, consecutive, and simultaneous). Emphasis on the fundamentals of translation in legal, medical, literary, business, commercial, media, sports, and other fields. Prerequisite: 3303. [3] (SBS)

SPAN4315 - Contrastive Analysis of Spanish and EnglishA comparison of the phonological, morphological, and syntactical structures of Spanish and English to demonstrate the similarities and differences between the linguistic systems of these two languages.Prerequisite: 3301W and 3302. [3] (SBS)

SPAN4320 - The Sounds of SpanishAnalysis of the production, nature, and systemic function of the sounds of the Spanish language, as well as of problems frequently experienced by non-native speakers. Both standard and dialectal features of Spanish are examined. Offered on a graded basis only. Prerequisite: 3301W and 3302. [3] (SBS)

SPAN4325 - Language Variation in the Hispanic WorldFormation, general characteristics, distinctive features, and geographical extension of the principal dialectal regions of Spain and Spanish America. Both historical and modern dialects are considered. Emphasis on non-standard dialectal varieties of Spanish. Prerequisite: 3301W and 3302. [3] (SBS)

SPAN4330 - Words and StemsA morphological presentation of the structural principles governing the creation of noun, verb, adjective, and adverb along with an overview of the formation of the underlying stems. Prerequisite: 3301W and 3302. [3]

SPAN4335 - Grammatical Structure of SpanishAn introduction to the principles of modern Spanish morphology (word formation) and syntax (phrase structure and usage) through an analysis of the native speaker's organization of reality and use of language to reflect and to express that organization. Prerequisite: 3301W and 3302. [3] (SBS)

SPAN4340 - History of the Spanish LanguageOrigins and evolution of the Spanish (Castilian) language. Emphasis on the phonological and morphological development of Spanish within historical and cultural contexts of the Iberian Peninsula. Prerequisite: 3301W and 3302. [3] (SBS)

SPAN4345 - The Languages of SpainOrigins, development, and the contemporary sociolinguistic situation of the principal languages and dialects of Spain, including Castilian, Catalan, Galician, and Basque. Prerequisite: 3301W and 3302. [3] (SBS)

SPAN4350 - Communicating Across CulturesRelationships among discourse, identity, and culture. Linguistic construction of ethnicity and gender. Latin American and U.S. Latino ways of speaking. Prerequisite: 3303. [3] (SBS)

SPAN4355 - Spanish in SocietyLanguage variation and linguistic change. Regional, socioeconomic, gendered, and ethnic differences in spoken Spanish. Language as it shapes the identities of speakers. Language use in social contexts with comparisons to English. Prerequisite: 3303. [3] (SBS)

SPAN4360 - Discourse AnalysisLinguistic pragmatics. Speech acts in conversation as patterned activity rather than unpredictable behavior.Implications, presuppositions, discourse markers, and other pragmatic units. Comparisons with English.Prerequisite: 3303. [3] (SBS)

SPAN4400 - The Origins of Spanish LiteratureFrom its beginnings to the Renaissance; the creation of a social order and a cultural tradition. Close study of three literary landmarks - Poema del Cid, Libro de Buen Amor, La Celestina - and other prose and poetry selections. Prerequisite: 3303. [3] (HCA)

SPAN4405 - Literature of the Spanish Golden AgeRepresentative works from early modern Spain, including poetry, prose, and drama of the Renaissance and Baroque periods. Prerequisite: 3303. [3] (HCA)

SPAN4410 - Spanish Literature from the Enlightenment to 1900Essays and Neoclassic literature. Romanticism, Realism, and Naturalism. Representative works and authors from all genres. Prerequisite: 3303. [3] (HCA)

SPAN4415 - Spanish Literature from 1900 to the PresentRepresentative authors and works. Prerequisite: 3303. [3] (HCA)

SPAN4420 - Spanish American Literature from the Conquest to 1900Development of all forms from colonial times to the end of the 19th century. Patterns of interaction of Amerindian, African, and European cultural traditions. Unity and diversity of Spanish American literature.Prerequisite: 3303. [3] (HCA)

SPAN4425 - Spanish American Literature from 1900 to the PresentThe works of Neruda, Borges, Paz, Garcia M√°rquez and others. Prerequisite: 3303. [3] (HCA)

SPAN4430 - Contemporary Mexican Literature and CultureTwentieth- and twenty-first-century-Mexican history through literature, the visual arts, film, and performance.Taught in Spanish. Offered on a graded basis only. Prerequisite: 3303. [3] (INT)

SPAN4440 - Development of the Short StoryFrom early manifestations in Spain through its current forms in Spain and Spanish America. Prerequisite: 3303.[3] (HCA)

SPAN4445 - Development of the NovelFrom the seventeenth century through Realism and Naturalism in Spain and Spanish America. Prerequisite: 3303. [3] (HCA)

SPAN4450 - The Contemporary NovelSPAN4455 - Development of DramaCourse DescriptionSpanish theatrical works from 1600 to 1900, including the Golden age comedia, neoclassicism, romanticism, and early realism in drama. Prerequisite: 3303. [3] (HCA)

SPAN4455 - Development of DramaSpanish theatrical works from 1600 to 1900, including the Golden age comedia, neoclassicism, romanticism, and early realism in drama. Prerequisite: 3303. [3] (HCA)

SPAN4465 - The Theory and Practice of DramaCritical works and plays from different periods. Introduction to the principles of dramaturgy. Prerequisite: 3303.[3] (HCA)

SPAN4470 - Development of Lyric PoetryPopular and traditional forms; the sonnet and other Renaissance and Baroque classical forms. Romanticism.Prerequisite: 3303. [3] (HCA)

SPAN4475 - Contemporary Lyric PoetryFrom Modernism to the present in Spain and Spanish America. Prerequisite: 3303. [3] (HCA)

SPAN4500 - Critique of Technology: Perspectives from the Hispanic WorldInsights from modern literature and other arts reframing technology's role in culture. Popular works of social commentary from Latin American fiction writers and filmmakers. Offered on a graded basis only. Serves as repeat credit for SPAN 3893 section 01 in Spring 2023, Spring 2022, or Spring 2021. Prerequisite: 3303. [3]

SPAN4550 - The Theory and Practice of Literary TranslationTheoretical approaches and their consequences for the interpretation of translated texts. Practical application of these principles in the translation of both Spanish and Portuguese texts into English. Taught in Spanish. Written work in Spanish or Portuguese. Prerequisite: 3303. [3] (HCA)

SPAN4620 - Love and Honor in Medieval and Golden Age LiteratureThe evolution of the key themes of love and honor in works from various genres of medieval and Golden Age Spanish literature with special attention to sociohistorical context. Prerequisite: 3303. [3] (HCA)

SPAN4640 - Don QuixoteDirected reading and intensive study of the novel. Prerequisite: 3303. [3] (HCA)

SPAN4670 - Spanish RealismMethods of, implications to, and pitfalls of creating realistic characters in nineteenth-century Spanish novels.Prerequisite 3303. [3] (HCA)

SPAN4690 - Alterity and Migration in SpainHistorical and literary texts about nationalism and cultural difference. Representations of contact with Africa, the Americas, and Asia; regional identities; immigration; gender and racial issues. Prerequisite: 3303. [3] (P) SPAN4700 - Feminisms and Literature

Historical and literary texts about nationalism and cultural difference. Representations of contact with Africa, the Americas, and Asia; regional identities; immigration; gender and racial issues. Prerequisite: 3303. [3] (P) SPAN4700 - Feminisms and LiteratureSocio-historical context of "women's lit" and the literary canon of the twentieth century. High art and popular literature and culture through the lens of today's Latin American and intersectional feminisms. Prerequisite SPAN3303. [3] (P)

SPAN4720 - Literary Genres and National Identities in Latin AmericaA comparative approach to the rise of the national literary traditions from independence to the latter half of the twentieth century. Indigenist novels, abolitionist narratives, and gaucho poetry by colonial figures, including African slaves, indigenous peoples, and Argentine Gauchos. Prerequisite: 3303. [3] (P)

SPAN4725 - Jungle Narratives in Latin AmericaFrom the colonial period to the present. Evolution of the representation of the jungle. Prerequisite: 3303. [3]

SPAN4730 - Modern Latin American PoetryDevelopment of poetry in Spanish America and Brazil during the twentieth century. Major poets andmovements, including both Spanish American Modernismo and Brazilian Modernismo. Poetry as a genre;composition and discussion of students' poetry. Taught in Spanish. Prerequisite: 3303. [3] (HCA)

SPAN4740 - Spanish-American Literature of the Boom EraThe Boom novel of the 1960s: Carlos Fuentes' La muerte de Artemio Cruz, Julio Cort√°zar's Rayuela, Mario Vargas Llosa's La ciudad y los perros, Guillermo Cabrera Infante's Tres tristes tigres, and Gabriel Garc√ä M√°rquez's Cien a√±os de soledad. Prerequisite: 3303. [3] (HCA)

SPAN4741 - Spanish-American Literature of the Post-Boom EraThe post-Boom novel from the 1970s to the present; analysis of related films. Manuel Muig's Boquitas pintadas, Me llamo Rigoberta Mench√∫, Laura Esquivel's Coma agua para chocolate, Reinaldo Arena's Viaje a La Habana, and Daisey Rubiera Castillo's Reyita, sencillamente. Prerequisite: 3303. [3] (P)

SPAN4750 - Afro-Hispanic LiteratureFrom nineteenth-century slave narrative to modern writers such as Miguel Barnet, Alejo Carpentier, and Quince Duncan. Prerequisite: 3303. [3] (P)

SPAN4755 - Latina and Latin American Women WritersContemporary writing of women in Latin America and of Latinas in the United States. Representation of sexuality and the maternal body. Prerequisite: 3303. [3] (P)

SPAN4760 - Literature and MedicineModern intersections of literature and medicine in Latin America. From the social hygiene literature of the nineteenth century to the autobiographical disease narrative of the late twentieth century. Prerequisite 3303.[3] (P)

SPAN4765 - Latin American Fiestas: Mexico, The Andes, and the CaribbeanComparative analysis of the celebration phenomenon as a stark contrast to everyday reality. Festive integration of Amerindian, African, and European legacies embedded in the identity of three Latin American regions.Colonial and contemporary texts, paintings, and film. Serves as repeat credit for SPAN 3893 Section 01 in Fall 2017. Prerequisite: 3303. [3] (P)

SPAN4810 - Images of the CityLiterary representations of cityscapes in Spain and Latin America. Prerequisite: 3303. [3] (HCA)

SPAN4980 - Undergraduate SeminarClose contextual readings of major Hispanic literary texts through selected critical approaches. Open to junior and senior majors in Spanish; required of candidates for honors. Prerequisite: 3303. [3] (HCA)

SPAN4998 - Senior Honors Thesis[3] (No AXLE credit)

SPAN4999 - Senior Honors Thesis[3] (No AXLE credit)

SPED1001 - Commons iSeminarCommons Seminar, a 1-hour small seminar experience, open to first-year students. Students and faculty will collaboratively explore a specialized topic in depth in this university-wide seminar sponsored by The Ingram Commons. General Elective credit only. [1]

SPED1115 - Freshman SeminarSelected Topics for first-year students [3]

SPED1175 - Freshmen SeminarProvides students with an overview of the undergraduate program in special education. Faculty members from each program area share their experiences and research projects. Students complete a 15-hour service project with individuals with disabilities in the community. [1]

SPED1210 - Introduction to ExceptionalityExamines issues and trends in special education and overviews the characteristics of persons with disabilities.Covers essential issues and theories relating to special education and the development of exceptional persons with special attention to normal and atypical human development. Multi-cultural, humanistic, and legal issues are addressed. [3]

SPED2110 - Introduction to Teaching Students with DisabilitiesThis course consists of two major components. The first component focuses on special education law, writing IEPs, developing lesson plans, effective teaching behaviors, progress monitoring, and methods for grouping students. The second component provides an overview of instructional models that have empirical support for their effectiveness in teaching students with disabilities. [3]

SPED2160 - Cultural Diversity in American Education(Also listed as EDUC 2160) Focuses on cultural diversity and the ways in which it has been defined and treated in the American educational system. An interdisciplinary perspective informs the course, with particular attention to history, sociology, psychology, anthropology, and educational literature. [3]

SPED2310 - Managing Academic and Social BehaviorThis course is designed to prepare students to manage classroom behavior using behavioral principles.Definition and measurement of behavior, reinforcement strategies, systematic program development, basic formats for classroom instruction, and techniques for monitoring student progress are presented. Emphasizes procedures for increasing academic and socially appropriate behavior through classroom activities. Students apply their skills in classroom settings. Prerequisite: SPED 1210. Corequisite: 1 hour of SPEDH 3871 or SPEDS3871. [3]

SPED3332 - High Poverty Youth: Improving Outcomes(Also listed as HOD 3332) Youth from high poverty backgrounds often are placed at risk for a host of unfavorable outcomes including academic failure, school dropout, drug abuse, unemployment, andincarceration. In this class, we will be working with schools and community agencies in Nashville to improve outcomes for youth living in high-poverty neighborhoods. We will have class meetings weekly as well as ongoing field-based experiences. Field work will include mentoring, tutoring, or providing job readiness training to youth in neighborhood community centers or in students' high schools. [3]

SPED3770 - Accommodating Academic Diversity in the ClassroomExplores the importance and difficulty of teaching heterogeneously grouped students in mainstream classrooms and offers specific instructional strategies for doing so effectively. Focuses explicitly and exclusively on methods to help classroom teachers instruct and manage the behavior of a broad range of students-students with and without disabilities at multiple points along the achievement continuum. [3]

SPED3850 - Independent Study in Special EducationSemi-independent study of selected topics in special education. May be repeated. Consent of instructor required. [1-3]

SPED3890 - Special Topics in Special EducationStudy of selected topics or issues related to special education such as teaching culturally or linguistically diverse learners, accommodating academic diversity in classrooms, or augmentative communicationtechniques. May be repeated for credit with change in topic. [1-3]

SPED3980 - Honors Seminar in Special EducationThis seminar is completed as part of the Honors Program in Special Education, which is designed to allow students experiences working with a faculty member on research activities. The course is taken during the junior year concurrent with engagement in research with a faculty mentor's team for at least five hours per week. During weekly meetings, students will be introduced to various research methodologies, read and discuss articles and studies that use a variety of research designs, examine and share their roles on a faculty mentor's team, and ultimately, complete and share an Honors Project at the end of the spring semester. Acceptance into the Honors Program and permission of the instructor are required. [0-1]

SPED4950 - Student Teaching SeminarStudents complete assignments and structured activities that demonstrate their ability to apply knowledge, skills, and dispositions acquired during the core courses and field-based experiences of the special education major. The weekly seminar discussion focuses on understanding situations and solving problems that naturally occur during the student teaching experience. A $300.00 Teacher Performance Assessment fee is associated with this course. Must co-register for either SPED 4954 or 4951. [3]

SPED4951 - Student Teaching in Special EducationObservation, participation, and classroom teaching for undergraduate students in any area of exceptionality.Placements are dependent on license areas. Prerequisite: Admission to student teaching. Corequisite: SPED4950. [9]

SPED4954 - Student Teaching in Special Education and Education(Also listed as EDUC 4954) Observation, participation, and classroom teaching for undergraduate students in any area of education combined with any area of exceptionality. Placements are dependent on license and endorsement areas. Prerequisite: Admission to student teaching. Corequisite: SPED 4950. [9]

DifficultiesThis is an introductory course in teaching students with severe and persistent academic and behavior problems at the high school setting. The first half of the course covers models of teaching special education at the secondary level, transition-related legislation, post-school outcomes of high school students with disabilities, and dropout prevention within a context of cultural diversity. The second half focuses on empirically-based secondary special education strategies, including academic/study skills and accommodations, social skills, self-determination, ITP development, and career education and employment. [3]

Difficulties: K-8This methodological course consists of two components. The first focuses on the possible causes for disabilities in the area of mathematics and assessment of those disabilities. The second emphasizes explicit teaching procedures, direct instruction, and instructional design principles that apply to teaching mathematics in grades K-8. Prerequisite: SPED 1210 and 3308. [3]

SPEDH3348 - Language and LearningThis course examines writing and language development, the written and language difficulties encountered by students with high incidence disabilities, assessment and instruction of writing and language difficulties, as well as cultural diversity and writing and language differences. Not open to students who have earned credit for SPEDS 2430 without permission. Total credit for this course and SPEDS 2430 will not exceed 3 credit hours.Credit hours reduced from second course taken (or from test or transfer credit) as appropriate. [3]

SPEDH3358 - Advanced Reading Methods for Students with Severe and Persistent Academic and Behavior DifficultiesThis course focuses on advanced methods of assessment and instruction methods related to teaching reading.Candidates in this course will gain competency in using formative assessments to identify students with severe and persistent reading difficulties, as well as expertise in and knowledge of teaching approaches and curricula for improving decoding, vocabulary, fluency, and comprehension abilities. Prerequisite: SPED 1210 and 3338.Co-requisite: 1 hour of SPED 3871. [3]

Difficulties 6-12This mathematics methods course for teaching 6-12th grade students with severe and persistent academic and behavior difficulties consist of two major components. The first component focuses on the possible causes of math disabilities and assessment of math disabilities. The second component emphasizes instructional design principles, explicit teaching procedures, interventions, and mathematics pedagogy at the secondary level. [3]

SPEDH3771 - Practicum: Accommodating Academic Diversity in the ClassroomThis practicum is designed to allow students to work with both special educators and general educators regarding the needs of students with disabilities. Emphasis is placed on accessing the general education curriculum. Corequisite: SPED 3770 or 3777. [5]

SPEDH3778 - School and Classroom Supports Teaching Students Academic Behavior DifficultiesThis course focuses on practices to support teaching and learning of students with severe and persistent academic and behavior difficulties. Core topics include the following: (1) Effective classroom management to enhance appropriate behavior, prevent problem behavior, and support students at-risk for and with behavior difficulties; (2) Research, efficacy and models of co-teaching; (3) Collaboration with colleagues and families; (4) Technology use to support instruction and accessibility; and (5) Ethical professional behavior. [3]

SPEDH3871 - Field Work in Special Education for Mild/Moderate DisabilitiesField-based application of correlated course content to classroom strategies. Planning, implementation, and evaluating instructional procedures for students with mild to moderate disabilities. May be repeated.Prerequisites: SPED 1210 [1-3].

SPEDS2120 - Issues in Family InterventionAn overview of different approaches, current issues, and problems involved in working with and supporting families. Emphasis is placed on how a child with disabilities affects and is affected by parents, siblings, the extended family, and the community. Strategies for effective communication for the purpose of information sharing and collaborative planning with families are provided. [3]

SPEDS2430 - Introduction to Language and CommunicationOverview of normal language development, psycholinguistic terminology and research, speech and language disorders and their remediation, and specific intervention procedures for the development of speech and language skills in children and youth. Not open to students who have earned credit for SPEDH 3348 without permission. Total credit for this course and SPEDH 3348 will not exceed 3 credit hours. Credit hours reduced from second course taken (or from test or transfer credit) as appropriate. [3]

SPEDS2450 - Augmentative and Alternative CommunicationThis course is designed to provide an overview of the field of augmentative and alternative communication (AAC) for use with young children and school-age children with severe disabilities. Specifically, the course will provide an overview of the theories that are important to the understanding of appropriate uses of AAC systems, and the course will provide information about the efficacy of these systems with students with severe disabilities. Topics will include guidelines for selecting, implementing, using, and monitoring the use of AACsystems. [3]

systems. [3]Provides information on the nature and needs of individuals with severe disabilities and the roles of federal, state, and local agencies in providing services to this population. Emphasis is placed on strategies for the acquisition and generalized use of age appropriate functional skills in natural community-based settings.Methods for developing and implementing individualized programming across specialized curricular areas such as communicative, cognitive, functional academic, motor, domestic living/self-help, recreation/leisure, vocational and general community living skills. Must co-register for SPEDS 3871. [3]

SPEDS3312 - Procedures in Transition to Adult Life(Also listed as HODC 3312) Overview of history, legislation, and practice in the areas of community and employment integration for persons with disabilities. Emphasis on various strategies for promoting a successful transition from school to life. Students are required to develop instructional plans for integration within the community. Students will apply their skills in community or classroom settings. Prerequisite: SPED 2310.Corequisite: SPEDS 3871. [3]

SPEDS3330 - Characteristics of Students with Low Incidence DisabilitiesThis course provides information on the history, nature, characteristics, and needs of students with exceptionalities. Neurological impairments resulting in motor dysfunction, sensory impairments, and the combination of these are discussed. Information is provided on the physical, medical, and educational management of students with severe, profound, and multiple disabilities in educational settings. Corequisite: SPEDS 3871. [3]

SPEDS3350 - Access to General Education and Teaching Functional AcademicsThe course provides in-depth information on teaching students with severe disabilities. Emphasis is on strategies for the acquisition and generalized use of age-appropriate functional skills in natural school and community-based settings. Methods for developing and implementing individualized programming acrossspecialized curricular areas such as communicative, cognitive, functional academic, motor, domestic living/self-help, recreation/leisure, and general community living skills. Current research evidence to support effective practices is stressed. [3]

SPEDS3600 - Teaching Reading to Students with Severe DisabilitiesThis course will present empirically validated instructional procedures to address the academic deficits of students with severe disabilities across principle domains of reading instruction including oral language, concepts of print, phonological awareness, phonics, vocabulary, comprehension, writing, and content area literacy. Includes integration of explicit teaching procedures, direct instruction, and instructional design principles that apply to a range of academic domains. Proficiency in the development of assessment profiles, instructional lessons, monitoring of progress through curriculum-based measures and data-based decision making is required. Students will apply their skills in classroom settings. Prerequisites: SPED 1210 and SPEDS3330. Corequisite: SPEDS 3300. [3]

SPEDS3661 - Advanced Fieldwork in Autism, Intellectual, and Multiple DisabilitiesStudents will participate in field-work in special education, specifically in classrooms for students with severe exceptionalities and/or autism. Students will complete activities tied to a fieldwork in special education seminar.This course may be repeated. Corequisite: SPEDS 3667. Prerequisites SPED 3871 both fall and spring. [3]

SPEDS3667 - Seminar in Teaching Students with Autism, Intellectual, and Multiple DisabilitiesSeminar for undergraduate students related to their field-work in local classrooms with severe disabilities and/or autism. Students will complete various assignments and implement them in a classroom setting. This course may be used to satisfy the Peabody College writing requirement. Prerequisites: SPED 1210, 2120, 2450, SPEDS3300, 3330, 3312, 3350. Corequisite: SPEDS 3661. [3]

SPEDS3871 - Fieldwork in Autism, Intellectual, and Multiple DisabilitiesField-based application of correlated course content to classroom strategies. Planning, implementation, and evaluating instructional procedures for students with severe disabilities. May be repeated. Prerequisites: SPED1210, SPED 2110, SPED 2430. Fall semester Corequisites: SPED 2310, and SPEDS 3330. Spring SemesterCorequisites: SPED 2450, SPEDS 3312, and SPED 3328. [1-3].

SPEDV3150 - Introduction to Students with Visual Impairments and DeafblindnessStudents with visual impairments, including blindness, low vision, and deafblindness, represent a diverse population. This course provides an introductory overview on individuals with visual impairments including issues and trends around their education and development from early childhood through young adulthood.Students in the class will learn how to collaborate on multidisciplinary teams to support students with visual impairments across learning environments. Considerations for creating accessible assessments, instruction, and interventions for students with visual impairments, including students with additional disabilities, will be examined. At the end of this course, students will have a solid understanding of supports and special considerations for students with visual impairments and deafblindness. [3]

SPEDV3305 - Medical and Educational Implications of Visual ImpairmentsAssessment of sensory function, including integration of information from medical and rehabilitation vision care specialists, as basis for planning, implementing, and monitoring intervention/education for learners with visual impairments, with emphasis on specific visual disorders, functional use of senses, assistive technology for enhancing visual function (i.e., optical and nonoptical devices), and family/child characteristics. Linking structure/function of visual system to most prevalent visual conditions, identifying implications of conditions for development and learning, and identifying appropriate accommodations for optimizing visual function. Roles of teachers of students with visual impairments; medical, educational, and rehabilitation professionals; families; and other team members in optimizing outcomes for students with visual impairments. Content provided through lectures, demonstrations, observations, laboratory dissections, and integrated fieldwork. [3]

SPEDV3315 - Issues & Trends for Teaching Students with Visual ImpairmentsIntroduction to the literature, history, principles, programs, practices, and problems in the field of visual impairment/blindness. Role of teacher of students with visual impairments in providing access to the general core curriculum, providing instruction in the expanded core curriculum for students with visual impairments, and introduction to assistive technology. Using assessment and data driven decision making to guide intervention planning, implementation, and progress monitoring. Course content provided through lectures, demonstrations, observations, and integrated fieldwork. [3]

SPEDV3335 - Braille Reading and WritingThis course is an introduction to literary braille code (Unified English Braille) and braille codes for mathematics.Students will learn to read and write braille. This course is specifically designed for future teachers of students with visual impairments. Consent of instructor required. [1]

SPEDV3345 - Communication and Literacy Skills for Students with Visual ImpairmentsPromoting/teaching communication and literacy skills, including use of assistive technology for communication and literacy (augmentative communication devices, computer-assisted instruction, keyboarding skills, nonoptical devices for enhancing reading and writing, etc.) for students with visual impairments, including those with multiple disabilities. Special emphasis on learning media assessments; assessment of communication and literacy skills for intervention planning, implementation, and program monitoring; accessibility and production of appropriate learning media. Course content provided through lectures, demonstrations, observations, and integrated fieldwork. [3]

Promoting/teaching communication and literacy skills, including use of assistive technology for communication and literacy (augmentative communication devices, computer-assisted instruction, keyboarding skills, nonoptical devices for enhancing reading and writing, etc.) for students with visual impairments, including those with multiple disabilities. Special emphasis on learning media assessments; assessment of communication and literacy skills for intervention planning, implementation, and program monitoring; accessibility and production of appropriate learning media. Course content provided through lectures, demonstrations, observations, and integrated fieldwork. [3]Lectures, discussions, and simulated activities in teaching orientation, mobility concepts and skills to students with visual impairments. Impact of visual impairment on motor and cognitive development and strategies for promoting optimal development and learning, sensory use, and independent travel, including assistive technology. Taught by an orientation and mobility specialist. Course content provided through lectures, demonstrations, observations, and integrated fieldwork. [3]

SPEDV3385 - Educational Access and Collaboration for Students with Visual ImpairmentsAdvanced strategies for providing access to the general core curriculum and providing instruction in the expanded core curriculum for students with visual impairments, early intervention and family-centered practices, with particular emphasis on assistive technology and universal design for learning. Course content provided through lectures, demonstrations, observations, and integrated fieldwork. [3]

SPEDV3900 - Teaching BrailleThis course focuses on strategies for teaching braille to students with visual impairments, methods of braille production, and an introduction to advance braille codes teachers of students with visual impairments need to be familiar with. Students will read, write, and proofread braille; observe teachers as they teach braille codes to students with visual impairments; and acquire technology skills required to teach and produce braille to students with visual impairments. [2]

SWAH1101 - Elementary Swahili I (UVA)Listening, speaking, reading and writing. Course taught at University of Virginia; Vanderbilt students participate through video conference and/or telepresence classroom. Offered on a graded basis only. [3] (No Axle Credit) SWAH1102 - Elementary Swahili II (UVA)

Listening, speaking, reading and writing. Course taught at University of Virginia; Vanderbilt students participate through video conference and/or telepresence classroom. Offered on a graded basis only. [3] (No Axle Credit) SWAH1102 - Elementary Swahili II (UVA)Offered on a graded basis only. Prerequisite: 1101. [3] (INT)

SWAH2201 - Intermediate Swahili I (UVA)Grammatical skills, speaking, and writing through a reading of Swahili texts. Course taught at University of Virginia; Vanderbilt students participate through video conference and/or telepresence classroom. Offered on a graded basis only. Prerequisite: 1102. [3] (INT)

SWAH2202 - Intermediate Swahili II (UVA)Offered on a graded basis only. Prerequisite: 2201. [3] (INT)

THTR1001 - Commons iSeminarTopics vary. General Elective credit only. [1] (No AXLE credit)

THTR1101 - Theatre Production PracticumHands-on participation in various production roles. [1-3] (No AXLE credit)

THTR1111 - First-Year Writing SeminarIndependent learning and inquiry in an environment in which students can express knowledge and defend opinions through intensive class discussion, oral presentations, and written expression. May be repeated for credit once if there is no duplication of topic, but students may earn only up to 3 credits in any 1111 course per semester of enrollment. [3; maximum of 6 credits total for all semesters of 1111] (AXLE credit category varies by section)

THTR1611 - Fundamentals of ActingThe role of the actor in the theatre with emphasis on artistic self-expression through improvisation and development of performance skills. Available on a graded basis only. [3] (HCA)

THTR1701 - Scenic and Costume Production PracticumScenic and costume construction skills; production lab for THTR 1711. Offered on a graded basis only.Prerequisite or corequisite: THTR 1711. [1] (No AXLE credit)

THTR1711 - Scenery and Costume ProductionContemporary concepts, methods, and practices employed in the planning and implementation of stage scenery and costumes. Communication, creative problem solving, and organizational management through research, lecture, and experiential learning. [3] (HCA)

THTR2201 - Ritual and World PerformanceIncluding festivals of ancient Greece, Rome, Medieval Europe, and Mesoamerica; Japanese Noh, Kabuki, and Bunraku; African dance and postcolonial theatre. [3] (INT)

THTR2202W - The European StageIncluding the Italian Renaissance, French neoclassicism, English Restoration, German and French romanticism, and the modernist movements of realism, symbolism, Dada and futurism, expressionism, epic theatre, and absurdism. [3] (INT)

THTR2204 - The U.S. StageIncluding British colonial and revolutionary drama; frontier theatre; melodrama; minstrelsy, vaudeville, burlesque, and the musical stage; pageantry and community theatre; postwar realism; African-American, Chicana/o, feminist, and Asian-American theatre movements. [3] (US)

THTR2206W - Cultural Identity and the American MusicalCultural analysis of musical theatre texts (book, music, and choreography) and production practices onstage and screen. Study of musical history, artistry, and cultural theory, including constructions of race, ethnicity, gender, and sexuality. [3] (US)

THTR2311W - Writing for the Stage and ScreenTechniques for writing plays and screenplays with critical attention to dramatic themes and characterization. [3]

THTR2651 - Play DirectionPlay direction as an aid to critical understanding and appreciation of the theatre. Development of techniques.Prerequisite: 1611. [3] (HCA)

THTR2781 - The History of FashionMen's and women's fashion from ancient times to the present. Women's roles in society as reflected in their clothing. [3] (P)

THTR3201W - Contemporary Drama and Performance CriticismDramatic literature and performance theory. Advanced techniques in writing performance criticism.Prerequisite: at least sophomore standing and 1010, 1010W, or 1111. [3] (P)

THTR3207 - Storytelling as PerformanceMultiple cultural traditions, including the development and practice of oral language skills. [3] (HCA) THTR3281 - Theatre in London

Multiple cultural traditions, including the development and practice of oral language skills. [3] (HCA) THTR3281 - Theatre in LondonIntensive overseas summer study program in contemporary British theatre. Ten productions in London covering a broad spectrum of theatrical offerings. Weekly seminars with artists and administrators from the British professional stage. [3] (P)

THTR3282 - Theater and Performance in the United KingdomMaymester abroad. Performing arts scenes of London, Glasgow, and Edinburgh. Contemporary British theatre: state-funded, commercial, and independent artistry. Performance styles and traditions. [3] (HCA)

THTR3311 - PlaywritingInstruction in writing plays with critical attention to dramatic themes and characterization. Prerequisite: THTR2311W. [3] (HCA)

THTR3311W - PlaywritingInstruction in writing plays with critical attention to dramatic themes and characterization. Serves as repeat credit for THTR 3311. [3] (HCA)

THTR3600 - Rehearsal-ActingStudents performing major roles in university theatre productions may receive 1 credit hour per role at the discretion of the director. Full character analysis and periodic reports of rehearsal progress are required.Prerequisite: 3611. May be repeated for a total of 3 credits, but students may earn only up to 2 credits per semester of enrollment. [1-2; maximum of 3 credits total for all semesters of THTR 3600] (No AXLE credit) THTR3611 - Jazz Acting

Prerequisite: 3611. May be repeated for a total of 3 credits, but students may earn only up to 2 credits per semester of enrollment. [1-2; maximum of 3 credits total for all semesters of THTR 3600] (No AXLE credit) THTR3611 - Jazz ActingActor training with an emphasis on Afrocentric methods such as improvisation and ensemble performance.Offered on a graded basis only. Prerequisite: 1611. [3] (HCA)

THTR3700 - Rehearsal-ProductionStudents performing major technical assignments in university theatre productions may receive 1 credit hour per assignment at the discretion of the technical director. Detailed plans of expected work and full reports on all crew sessions are to be submitted. May be repeated for a total of 3 credits, but students may earn only up to 2credits per semester of enrollment. Prerequisite: consent of instructor. [1-2; maximum of 3 credits total for all semesters of THTR 3700] (No AXLE credit)

THTR3721 - Set DesignAesthetics and processes. Development and communication of design ideas through script analysis, research, virtual and physical model-building. Contemporary scenic practices. Prerequisite: 1711. [3] (HCA)

THTR3741 - Costume DesignAesthetics and processes. Development and communication of design ideas through the drawing and rendering of the costumed figure. Prerequisite: 1711 or 2781. [4] (HCA)

THTR3761 - Lighting and Sound DesignAesthetics and processes. Development and communication of design ideas through script analysis andresearch. Lighting and audio theory and practice. Contemporary lighting and audio technology. Prerequisite: 1711. [4] (HCA)

THTR3781 - Management in the TheatreRoles of theatre and stage managers. Tools and methods. Organizational theories and skills. Prerequisite: 1711.[3] (HCA)

THTR3851 - Independent StudyA research project in selected aspects of theatre and drama to be arranged with the instructor. [Variable credit: 1-3] (No AXLE credit)

THTR3891 - Selected Topics in TheatreIntensive study of a particular area of theatre. Emphasis on personal investigation and written reports. May be repeated for credit more than once if there is no duplication in topic. Students may enroll in more than one section of this course each semester. [3] (No AXLE credit)

THTR4611 - Advanced Topics in ActingAdvanced study of select acting skills and techniques. Offered on a graded basis only. Prerequisite: 1611. [3]

THTR4998 - Senior Honors ThesisIndependent research and completion of an honors thesis, done in consultation with a member of the faculty in Theatre. Open only to those who qualify to begin departmental honors work in Theatre. [3] (No AXLE credit) THTR4999 - Senior Honors Thesis

Independent research and completion of an honors thesis, done in consultation with a member of the faculty in Theatre. Open only to those who qualify to begin departmental honors work in Theatre. [3] (No AXLE credit) THTR4999 - Senior Honors ThesisIndependent research and completion of an honors thesis, done in consultation with a member of the faculty in Theatre. Open only to those who qualify to begin departmental honors work in Theatre. [3] (No AXLE credit) Tibetan Language

TBTN1101 - Elementary Tibetan I (UVA)Grammar and syntax of spoken and written Tibetan. Listening, speaking, reading, and writing from Tibetan short stories, proverbs, and other sources. Tibetan culture. Offered on a graded basis only. [4] (No AXLE credit) TBTN1102 - Elementary Tibetan II (UVA)

Grammar and syntax of spoken and written Tibetan. Listening, speaking, reading, and writing from Tibetan short stories, proverbs, and other sources. Tibetan culture. Offered on a graded basis only. [4] (No AXLE credit) TBTN1102 - Elementary Tibetan II (UVA)Grammar and syntax of spoken and written Tibetan; listening, speaking, reading and writing. Examples from Tibetan short stories and proverbs, among other sources. Exposure to Tibetan culture to improvecommunication skills, using a dynamic, interactive format . Offered on a graded basis only. Prerequisite: 1101.[4] (INT)

TBTN2201 - Intermediate Tibetan I (UVA)Grammar and syntax of spoken and written Tibetan. Listening, speaking, reading, and writing through the integrated use of spoken and literary forms. Enhanced knowledge of Tibetan culture. Offered on a graded basis only. [4] (INT)

TBTN2202 - Intermediate Tibetan II (UVA)Grammar and syntax of spoken and written Tibetan; listening, speaking, reading and writing through spoken and literary forms. Further study of Tibetan culture to improve communication skills. Offered on a graded basis only. Prerequisite: 2201. [4] (INT)

TURK1101 - Elementary Turkish I (Duke)Basic Turkish language and daily culture in modern-day Turkey. Grammar, listening, writing, and speaking.Offered on a graded basis only. [3] (No Axle Credit)

TURK1102 - Elementary Turkish II (Duke)Basic Turkish language and daily culture in modern-day Turkey. Turkish in everyday life and culture with media such as Youtube videos and songs. Offered on a graded basis only. Prerequisite: 1101. [3] (INT)

TURK2201 - Intermediate Turkish I (Duke)Oral, written, and reading forms via video lectures and audio conversations, TV commercials, film trailers, and news media. Offered on a graded basis only. Prerequisite: 1102. [3] (INT)

TURK2202 - Intermediate Turkish II (Duke)Oral, written, and reading forms via video lectures and audio conversations, TV programs, film trailers, and news media. Offered on a graded basis only. Prerequisite: 2201. [3] (INT)

UNIV2655 - Historic Black NashvilleThis course will explore the under-developed history of black Nashville from settlement to the early twentieth century. Through instructor and guest lectures, digital humanities instruction, site visits, and independent research in local archives, students will recover and document the lives of the city's enslaved and free people of color as well as the community institutions and social and artistic movements that defined the black experience in Nashville. As students gain substantive expertise, they will also learn research methods and multiple media and technologies for telling historical narratives. No credit for students who have earned credit for HIST 2655.Offered on a graded basis only. Landers and Sharfstein. FALL. [3] (US)

UNIV3100 - Rhythm of Change: African Music and African PoliticsThis class studies the relationship between music and politics in sub-Saharan Africa and focuses on a central question: How does music reflect and drive political change in Africa? The course synergizes popular music with modern African musical styles and centers around four political themes: (1) electoral politics, (2) violent conflict, (3) nationalism and identity, and (4) globalization. [3]

UNIV3200 - Race, Place, and PowerThis course will examine the crucial entanglement between race and place from an interdisciplinary and transnational perspective. Paying attention to three different national contexts--Brazil, South Africa, and the United States--the course will investigate the politics of spatial segregation and consider the global dimensions of racialized injustice and decolonial resistance. Through the study of literary texts, scholarly essays, film, music, video, and news media, we will ask how and why what appear to be vastly different racial regimes and socio-political contexts produce similar socio-economic outcomes and dominant ideologies. Students will also interrogate the spatial and racial politics of Nashville. [3]

UNIV3225 - Social EntrepreneurshipThis course will help nascent social entrepreneurs consider both opportunities and challenges presented by this emerging form of social action. Through a combination of lecture and discussion, guest speakers and written case studies, we will engage the important questions of "what," "so what," and "what next" that drive the ideas and practice of social entrepreneurs. While the course will place particular emphasis on the areas of education and community development, time will be spent looking at social change in other arenas as well. [3]

UNIV3275 - The Ethics of Artificial IntelligenceOver the past decade, AI technology has progressed exponentially, becoming a key fabric of our everyday lives across e-commerce, educational and research platforms, entertainment, and the popular imaginary. While marvelous advancements in the sector have been celebrated as the sublimation of human reason, themysterious workings, existential implication, and potential misuse of AI have also become cause for concern, catalyzing demands to establish ethical standards and regulatory parameters. Responding to this urgent need, this course explores the composition and representations of AI technology from an ethical perspective. Students will learn basic yet fundamental aspects of intelligent, computational modeling and processing, and critically reflect on their learnings through literary/philosophical/legal/business materials through workshops, discussions, guest lectures, and field trips. Aiming to cultivate interdisciplinary and immersive learning, the course will build toward creative projects, which will be showcased in a conference-fair at the end of the semester. [3]

UNIV3278 - Tackling Big Questions with Mobile Cloud ComputingThis course will address big questions motivated by the rapid growth of interest across disciplines in computing technologies that have occurred over the past decade, due in part to the pervasive and profound impact of mobile devices and powerful cloud computing services on many aspects of our daily lives. Examples of these big questions include how mobile cloud computing technologies are (1) being used to engage teens with chronic diseases, (2) changing political discourse in the US and around the world, and (3) helping economically disadvantaged individuals bridge the digital divide to obtain better guidance on nutrition and legal matters. This class will provide a multidisciplinary environment where undergraduate and graduate students from multiple Schools team with Computer Science students to address big questions in a project-based format. Each project will be sponsored and mentored by a subject matter expert in the field from other Schools on campus, with the goal of providing students a hands-on experience understanding and applying key mobile cloud computing techniques, tools, and principles needed to tackle these big questions. FALL, SPRING [3 each semester; maximum of 6 hours total for all semesters]

UNIV3315 - Planetary Health, Policy and Social JusticeThis is a three credit hour elective course designed for students interested in exploring the intersections between primary care, planetary health and climate change (according to WHO, currently the greatest threat to global health), social justice and policy. The causes of climate change ad the resulting primary, secondary and tertiary impacts on people and communities will be examined through the lens of global health and policy.Students will develop evidence based and targeted adaptation and mitigation strategies as well as policy-based solutions, all incorporating science and engineering, political science and policy, law and economics as well as nursing and medicine to address healthspan disparities related to climate change and social vulnerability. [3]

UNIV3320 - The Causes and Consequences of LGBT Public PoliciesThis new Multicultural University Course will introduce students to critical questions about public policies relevant to LGBTQIA populations, including: legal access to same-sex marriage; nondiscrimination policies in employment, housing, and public accommodation, including whether they are trans-inclusive; so-called'bathroom bills'; religious freedom restoration laws (also called 'conscience' acts); and others. The course will investigate the causes, correlates, and consequences of these policies using the lenses of economics, law, sociology, political science, and public health and medicine. Students will critically analyze leading research articles and mainstream media discussions of LGBTQ-related public policies; hear from guest speaker experts; perform an immersive research project; and visit Tennessee policymakers to understand views on a range of LGBTQ-related issues. [3]

UNIV3325 - Health Policy Analysis & AdvocacyHealth is both wildly sought after and wildly controversial. We race for cures, rally for affordable and accessible health care, debate the ethics of various treatments and pass laws meant to keep our people healthy. This Multicultural University Course will prepare students to be more effective and skillful participants in debates over health policy by immersing them in the national and Tennessee health policy environment. This course promotes critical scholarship and leadership through engagement with national policy experts, media and locally elected officials. Students will learn how to leverage publicly available data to write policy reports that address important health policy problems; additional readings and skills-based exercises are required for graduate students. [3]

UNIV3330 - The History of Science and BrewingHistorical and scientific perspectives on brewing beer and related beverages. History of brewing and beer production, religious dimensions of beer consumption in past societies, biochemical processes of fermentation and alcohol abuse, and neuroscience of reward and addiction. The course includes a laboratory component. [3]

UNIV3350 - Design Thinking, Design DoingThis course is an introduction to theories and practices of design. The design thinking elements of the course offer a critical understanding of methods for researching interactions between humans and the social and built environment, whereas the design doing elements teach how to develop purposeful interventions that result in more meaningful and effective interactions. Throughout, we will examine how (and what) people can learn while engaged in the design process. Working in teams, students in the course will spend significant time observing, listening, analyzing, story telling, and otherwise engaging users as they work in teams to develop and implement meaningful and transformative designs to projects in the domains of education, health and business.[3]

UNIV3360 - Data Science Methods for Smart City ApplicationsIntegrating technological and socio-economic approaches to challenges facing metropolitan areas experiencing unprecedented growth. Infrastructure and resources needed for sustainable development and maintaining quality of life. Adapting technology-driven internet-of-things framework to Smart Cities concept of urban development. Ethical and justice concerns, including privacy and equitable access to data. Algorithmic methods of machine learning and statistics, such as supervised and unsupervised learning, factor analysis, multidimensional regression analysis, and hierarchical linear modeling. Agent-based and equation-based simulation modeling. Linear and nonlinear optimization. Mixed methods approaches to gathering and analyzing qualitative and quantitative socio-economic data. Computational methods for data from large distributed infrastructure.The course will combine lectures on the fundamental material, and a semester-long multi-disciplinary group project. [3]

